andinthemajorityofcasesthatisasafeassump- her. But if the teenager refuses, is the minister tion. We expect ministers to respect individual obligated to tell the parents, to whom the minis- privacy and autonomy and, indeed, they are teralsohasaninherent,obligatoryrelationshipof bound by professional ethics to do so. Without trust? A variety of factors might enter into the theexpectationofconfidentiality,thosewhoneed decision—the age and maturity of the girl, what pastoral help or spiritual counsel might never theministerknowsaboutthehealthofthefamily seekit.Butclergyarenotonlyresponsibletoindi- system,thestageofthepregnancy,andsoforth. vidualcongregants.Theyarealsostewardsofthe It is important to note that the issue of clergy overall spiritual and moral well-being of the con- confidentiality is further complicated by the laws gregationasawhole.Inaddition,clergyfeel,and regardingwhetherornotclergy-congregantcom- may be mandated by law to consider, an obliga- munications are deemed inadmissible as legal tion to the good of society. At times these other testimony.Further,statesoftenhavelawsspecify- considerations may outweigh an individual con- ingwhocanwaiveconfidentiality,thecongregant gregant’sexpectationofconfidentiality. or the clergy person or both. Such laws may vary Generally speaking, in both law and ethics, from state to state or even from jurisdiction to confidentiality is considered only a prima facie jurisdiction.(Note:Generallyspeaking,courtscon- duty, meaning that it can be overridden by other siderfourfactorsindecidingwhatisconfidential— more compelling duties in certain circumstances whether the information was disclosed in a set- —toprotectsomeonefromharmtoselfortopro- ting where it might be overheard; whether the tectaninnocentthirdparty,forexample.Herewe information conveyed implies harm to the dis- aredealingintherealmofdangeroussecrets,and closer or to another person; whether the disclo- decisions regarding whether or not to divulge surewasmadeinthesacramentalcontextofcon- informationmayseemratherstraightforward.Ifa fessionofsins;andwhetherthepersonreceiving congregantconfessestoaministerthatheabused the disclosure is ordained professional clergy. achildinthechurch’sSundayschool,theminister (Read “Confidentiality in the Church: What the cannot keep that information secret. If an other- Pastor Knows and Tells” by D. Elizabeth Audette wise healthy adult reveals to a minister a plan to and Confidentiality and Clergy: Churches, Ethics commit suicide, most ministers would not hesi- and the Law by William W. Rankin for fuller dis- tate to break confidence in order to avert the sui- cussion of these matters.) It behooves clergy to cide, whether or not they are legally obligated to acquaint themselves with the relevant state and doso.(Manyjurisdictionsdohavelawsimposing municipal laws, particularly those regarding the a“dutytowarn”ora“dutytodivulge”whenclergy situations in which one has a “duty to warn” or possessknowledgeofchildorelderabuse,poten- “dutytodivulge.” tialhomicidesorsuicides,orparticipationincrim- However situations can arise in which one’s inalactivity.) ethical judgment appears to be at odds with the But not all cases where a clergy person may law. One might, because of a higher duty to pro- feeltheneedtobreakconfidentialityarethatclear tect,feeltheneedtodivulgeconfidentialcommu- cut.Toxicsecrets,becauseofthelackofimmedi- nicationsregardingapotentialsuicideevenwhen ate physical danger, may present more complex thereisnolegalobligationtodo.Alternately,one choicesabouthow,what,andtowhomtodivulge mightconsideraformofcivildisobedienceunder them. A teenager confesses she is pregnant and certain circumstances in order to meet the intends to seek an abortion and wants to keep demandsofconscienceandchoosenottoreport, this secret from her parents. In many cases the forexample,aplannedsuicidebyamentallycom- minister will most likely try to assuage her fears petentandterminallyillperson.Undersuchcir- regarding her parents’ response and urge her to cumstances, legal counsel should be sought so talk to them directly, even offering to accompany that the decision is not made without full 30 TransformationalLeadership understanding of the legal consequences. It often privy to sensitive information and are shouldnotbethepolicyofacongregationtocon- bound by their covenantal relationship with the donedisobedienceofexistinglaws. church to take issues of confidentiality seriously. Nevertheless,asSisselaBokstresses,anydeci- Lay leaders must also distinguish different kinds siontooverrideconfidentialityrequiresarigorously of secrets and may, at times, feel compelled to derived justification. William Rankin, arguing from consider higher ethical considerations, such Bok,offersfourguidelinestoaidinthedecision: whether to warn or to protect, when confronted • Istherequestforsecrecyafairrequest?Inother with toxic or dangerous secrets. Lay leaders, like words, could you reasonably make the same clergy, bear responsibility for the welfare of the requestofanotherifyourroleswerereversed? churchasawholeandwill,attimes,needtobal- ance individual requests for secrecy with the • Is what is being asked of you in consonance community’s need to know. Like clergy, lay lead- withyourdeepestvalues? ers should feel predisposed to honor confi- • Is what is being requested of you something dences, but if a rigorous moral justification to that you would regard as undesirable if any- overrideaconfidenceexists,theyshouldnotfeel oneelsedidit? theyhavebetrayedanotherbydivulgingtheinfor- • Does the request allow you to respond in mation. Even when a “promise not to tell” has wayscompatiblewithyourreligioustradition? been exacted, confidence can and should be BothRankinandBokcautionthatconfidential- breached if secrecy would allow violence to be ity issues in churches can become clouded by a done to innocent persons or involve complicity tendencytotreatsomeethicalproblemsaspurely in a crime. As Sissela Bok puts it in her book pastoralproblemsratherthanaswrongsforwhich Lying:MoralChoiceinPublicandPrivateLife,“We redress is needed. While this tendency may be canproperlypromiseonlywhatisourstogiveor motivatedbyalaudablecompassion,itmayjustas what is right for us to do,” that having “made a likely be motivated by an overestimation of one’s promise” does not justify participation in wrong abilitytochangeanother’sbehavior.Honestreflec- doing. Again, there is no substitute for personal tion on Rankin’s four questions mitigates these discernment. There will be times when the right tendenciessincetheyacknowledgebothobligation course involves potential conflict and pain. Such toone’sselfasapromise-keeperandobligationto is the burden of leadership. But the guidelines justice in community. Given that compelling rea- offered for clergy can be helpful to lay people sonstobreakconfidentialitycanexist,perhapsitis also.Likeclergy,laypeopleshouldnothesitateto alwaysmorehonesttostateone’sintentas“Iwill ask for advice, either from their minister or the trymybesttokeepconfidentialwhatyouareabout districtexecutive. to disclose but if you reveal something illegal or The positions of lay pastoral ministers and that puts yourself or another person in danger, I covenant group leaders warrant further discus- mayfeelobligatedtobreakyourconfidencetopro- sion.Trainingsforsuchlaypastoralministriesas tectyouoranotherperson.” the Befrienders Program or Stephen’s Ministry Whenconfusedaboutwhichcoursetofollow, explicitlyaddressconfidentialityissues,recogniz- clergy should not hesitate to seek counsel from ing that congregants in those roles will need other colleagues or district executives. In many ongoing supervision to strengthen their ministry. casesitispossibletotalkaboutasituationwith- Whendiscussingacase,theseprogramssuggest outdivulgingidentifyinginformation. omitting names or disguising identifying charac- Much of the discussion on clergy confiden- teristics to preserve the person’s anonymity and tiality is applicable to lay people in positions of the confidential nature of the information. Such leadership. While lay people do not possess any anapproachcanbehelpfulinothersituationsas legalprivilegeconcerningconfidentiality,theyare well; for example, when seeking advice from Boundariesand Confidentiality 31 another (one’s minister, a colleague, or district of life with grace. Phyllis Rose argues in Parallel executive) about whether or not to break a confi- Lives, Five Victorian Marriages that gossip is the dence.Furthermore,therewillbetimesincongre- beginning of moral inquiry, the low end of the gational life, as in clergy misconduct cases or ladder that leads to self understanding. In childabusecases,whenitisnecessarytodisclose Dakota, Kathleen Norris coins the phrase “holy facts and, at the same time, protect the vulnera- gossip”todescribegossipthatstrengthenscom- blebypreservingtheanonymityofthevictim. munal bonds. She points out that gossip is Mostcovenantgroupswithinourchurchesdo derived from the words for God and sibling and not have an expectation of complete confidential- thusmeansthosewhoarespirituallyrelated. ity.Itisexpectedthatmembersofcovenantgroups Whether or not we want to reclaim a positive willhaveconversationsamongthemselvesoutside definition of gossip, we need to share informa- thegroupmeetings.Itisalsoexpectedthatmem- tionaboutoneanotherifwearetotrulyminister bers of a covenant group will want to share their tooneanother.Ifweerrtoofarinthedirectionof experiences with non-members. Rev. Robert Hill anunqualifiedrighttoprivacy,ourcommunallife recommends a “covenant of discretion and will be stifled. On the other hand, we need to be respect for privacy interests of members.” Some respectful of personal autonomy. Whenever we groups have rules that members sharing particu- talkaboutsomeonewhoisn’tpresentweneedto larly private information within the group should ask ourselves if we are talking out of genuine identifyitassuchorthatonemustaskpermission concern for the other person or whether we are to share another’s identifying story. Discussion of talkingoutofaneedtofeedourownego—tofeel confidentialityandprivacyissuesshouldbepartof superior, to seem important or “in the know.” In thecovenantbuildingprocessforsuchgroups. this, as in so much, there is need for discern- Thereshouldbeongoingconversationsinour mentandjudgment. congregations about confidentiality and privacy Andthatiswhyweneedtotalkabouthowwe issues.Allmembersofthechurchneedtounder- talk. For it is through congregational conversa- stand the limits of confidentiality and recognize tion, which honors our commitments to one that blanket assurances of confidentiality, even another,thatwewillbestfindthewaystolivecre- from clergy, are neither possible nor wise. atively with the tension between openness and Furthermore, our congregations are covenantal privacy,truthtellingandconfidencekeeping. communities of people responsible to and for eachother.Anappropriatesharingofinformation is necessary if we are to minister to one another throughthetrialsandsorrowsoflifeandifweall are to grow spiritually. By joining a covenantal community one has made a choice to be in rela- tionship,tohaveothersinvolvedinourlives. Certainlynoneofuswantstoencouragemali- cious, intrusive, or even trivializing gossip, but a certain level of is probably inevitable and maybe even desirable in congregations. Writers like SisselaBokhavepointedoutthemanysupportive usesofgossip:Itallowsustolearnlife-lessonsby observing others; it conveys information vital to a group’s functioning; it spreads the word about who is sick or in need of help; and, it teaches through example how others navigate the trials 32 TransformationalLeadership Self-CareforReligiousLeaders Mental, Physical, Emotional and Spiritual Self-Care Fredric Muir During the check-in time at a clergy meeting assistants,officers,andteachers—mightponder several years ago, a colleague stood up and them during their tenure. All religious leaders announced, canhave auniquerelationshipwithcongregants (and other leaders) due to the supportive and I’ve decided to leave the church, that is, serving nature of their work. All religious leaders theministry.I’veconcludedthatIcan’tbe can and will be faced or confronted with a ver- a parish minister and a father and hus- sion of the challenges raised by my colleague’s band; I can’t do ministry and have a life. I announcement. think the Catholics may be on to some- One response to these questions has to do thing:Ministryisafull-timeandalifetime with self-care. Self-care is about keeping in bal- commitment. At this time in my life, I’m ancethestresses,demands,andexpectationsof unwillingtomakethatcommitment. religiousleadershipandtheintellectual,physical, HeandIwereaboutthesameage,bothmar- emotional, and spiritual dimensions of life. riedandfathersofsmallchildren.Hiswordssent When these are balanced, a healthy and whole- me wondering: Was it possible to do both min- some career, leadership role, and life can follow. istry and family? What kind of a husband, father, An important part of self-care is boundaries. A friend, brother, and son was I with all the boundary is a guideline that determines the stresses and challenges of my calling? Maybe I appropriateness of certain behavior in a particu- tooshouldbereconsideringandleavingthemin- lar context. Boundary guidelines can be written istry? Yet there were examples from my child- or unwritten. A Unitarian Universalist congrega- hood and youth of ministers and other religious tion could have a safe congregation covenant (a professionalswhohadbalancedthedemandsof behavior covenant that spells out specific ways work and personal life. And what about all my members and friends will be in relationship with collegial peers and mentors who had seemingly each other). There are also written codes of survived and often thrived? Was their success behavior and guidelines for religious profession- whatitappearedtobe? als (see the UUMA and LREDA guidelines). Though these questions and issues, and the Usually written boundaries provide clarity, but challengestheypose,couldberegularlyaskedby unwrittenboundariescancreateconfusion. clergy and other religious professionals, any reli- Boundariesinafaithcommunityareaformof giousleader—forexample,pastoralandworship self-care because they provide the clarity, limits, Mental,Physical,EmotionalandSpiritualSelf-Care 33 and opportunities that help leaders and congre- to the church at the top of the list. In one gantstomakedecisionsfreeofmisunderstanding, week, you will receive 1,643 ministers and pressure, coercion, and misplaced expectations. oneofthemshouldbeperfect.Havefaithin Boundaries can provide and maintain balance in this letter. One church broke the chain and one’s life and relationships. Recognizing and got its old pastor back in less than three understanding self-care and boundaries is vital months. for all religious leaders. Self-care and boundaries Welaughattheunrealisticexpectationsnamed areinterrelatedandreinforcing. in this chain letter. Yet how often some religious leaders have felt these demands; how often con- Danger Signs gregants think that changing leadership is the It’s so easy to get swept up in the pressures and answer.Whileweknowthatourfaithcommunities demandsofreligiousleadership.Forexample,it’s areflawed,asanyinstitutionis,wecan’thelpwant- notuncommonatreligiousprofessionals’orlead- ingtocreatethebestinstitutionwecan.Whenwe ers’ meetings to hear peers announce or discuss hear others describing their work and successes, allthecommonlyacceptedsignsofsuccess—how ourimageofanidealgetsreinforcedandwestrive hard they are working, how their congregations to make it a part of our leadership vision. So we are growing, how many awards they have won, work all the harder to make our vision come true. howmanyvolunteersareinvolved.Itallsoundsso We can even give ourselves over to this dream, perfect and could prompt one to ask: How can a which is admirable and altruistic, but it can bring congregation—one leader—appear to do every- withitdifficultyandhardship. thing and do it to everyone’s satisfaction? A Two danger signs that result from the lack of tongue-and-cheek article that appeared in several self-care—signsthatcouldbeprecursorstoques- newslettersaddressestheseissues: tionable behavior and permeable boundaries— Theresultofacongregationalquestionnaire arestressandburnout.Thoughthesetwoareoften hasdeterminedtheperfectministerforour confused,RoyOswald,authorofClergySelf-Care: congregation.Shewillpreachexactlyfifteen Finding A Balance for Effective Ministry, does an minutes. He condemns sin but never excellentjobofhelpingusunderstandthediffer- upsets anyone. She works from 8 A.M. to ences. Stress occurs with change, too many midnightandisalsojanitor.Hemakes$300 changesforapersontoabsorbintoolittletime. a week, wears good clothes, buys good Forexample,youmaybefamiliarwiththekindof books, drives a good car, and gives $300 a self-test seen in popular magazines and health week to those in need. She is twenty-eight journals.Itlistssignificantchangesinaperson’s years of age and has been preaching thirty life—illness,lossoffamilymembers,jobchange, years.Hehasaburningdesiretoworkwith a move, divorce, etc. If you’ve experienced the youthandspendsallofhistimewithelders. specifiednumberoftheseinoneyear,theauthors Ournewministerwillsmileallthetimewith say,yousufferfromtoomuchstress,whichmight a straight face because she has a sense of haveilleffectsonyou. humorthatkeepsherseriouslydedicatedto Changes in your faith community can also her work. He makes fifteen calls daily on contribute to stress—changes in membership, parish families, shut-ins, and hospitalized. programs,finances,staff,thebuilding,andmany She spends all her time evangelizing the more. As a leader, responding to these changes unchurchedandisalwaysinherofficewhen will, in part, fall on your shoulders. Congregants needed.Ifyourpastordoesn’tmeasureup, will expect you to provide direction and leader- simply send this letter to six other congre- ship. Too much change leads to stress. The gations that are tired of their pastors too. resultscanbephysicalandemotionalexhaustion Then bundle up your pastor and send him aswellasalossofdiscernmentandjudgment. 34 Self-CareforReligiousLeaders Burnout,ontheotherhand,istheresultoffeel- their office. Balancing the reality of this authority ing too much—too much compassion, empathy, with a mistrust of it and balancing leadership passion—all the things that religious leaders are visionwithcongregationalpolitycanbeachallenge expectedtoprovideandshow.Burnoutshowsupas for even the best religious leaders. Consequently, exhaustionandfrustrationandbringsonhopeless- owning the authority that comes with an institu- ness,cynicism,alossofidealism,andnegativism. tional position and not giving it away (often When religious leaders are heavily stressed or under the misguided pretense that “we’re all burned-out,theyoftenabandonself-carejustwhen equal here”), is important; abdicating one’s theyneeditthemost.Intheabsenceofself-care, position of leadership and its authority is irre- boundary lines can become permeable or even sponsible.Butcrossingtheboundaryofauthority disappear. and violating congregational polity is also irre- sponsible, and in most Unitarian Universalist Common Boundary Violations congregations it’s foolhardy. Maintaining, bal- The boundaries that religious leaders need to be ancing, and being aware of this demanding and aware of are many and the FaithTrust Institute difficult boundary are critical. Another common does an excellent job of presenting these. Five boundary violation is dual relationships. Simply possibleboundaryviolationsthattheynamehave stated in Clergy Misconduct: Sexual Abuse in the particular meaning and relevance due to their Ministerial Relationship, “A dual relationship is scope and applicability in Unitarian Universalist one in which a person attempts to fulfill two congregations. roles with the same person—for example, to All religious leaders should be aware of the have a professional and a personal relationship potential for misuse of power. For clergy, this can withthesameperson.” be an especially easy boundary violation to fall The boundary of a dual relationship is espe- into. The use of power can feel natural and ciallyeasytocrossforthoseservinginsmalltown expected. It’s tempting to make an issue or churches. A personal story will make my point. agenda personal, not only for the religious pro- The first congregation I served was in a rural vil- fessional but for any leader or teacher. Misusing lage.SoonafterIarrived,Iwasatatownmeeting one’s authority to embarrass, belittle, or under- and noticed another church’s minister on the mine a member, or to manipulate, ostracize, or othersideofthehall.Wehadmetbrieflyatameet- demonizeanotherisinappropriateandcrossesa ing, so I made my way over to him to renew our boundary. Congregations give their leaders fidu- acquaintance. “So how is everything going?” he ciary responsibility that must be safeguarded, asked. “Just fine. We really love it here,” I said: nowandforfuturegenerations. “And the people are great; everyone is so liberal Closely related is the need to balance authority and progressive.” He smiled and said, “That’s with congregational polity. Unitarian Universalists becauseyouhavethemall.”Thatis,alltheliberals have a mistrust of institutions and authority that and progressives. For religious leaders, especially originates in our history, which is filled with in small towns, the reality can be that those who oppressive, faith-threatening acts against our youhavethemostincommonwitharemembers movement. As a result, we are heirs to a deep- of the congregation you serve. Your members are rooted skepticism toward institutional power and the ones you might like to call your friends. They authority;thesehaveshapedourradicalcongrega- mayalsobeyourbanker,doctor,dentist,yourchil- tional polity. But authority and power, per se, are dren’steacher,oracardealer.Enteringintoa“sec- not bad. In any faith community, power is part of ular” relationship while still wearing a “sacred” institutional life. Whether leaders of institutions role can put a strain on both the religious leader are called, elected, or appointed, they will inherit andthemember.Thisisaboundarytostayaware theappropriateamountofpowerthatcomeswith ofandmonitorcarefully. Mental,Physical,EmotionalandSpiritualSelf-Care 35 Self-esteem issues represent another boundary Self-Care Strategies challenge. While serving a congregation as a Ifyoustartbyfollowingthroughwithoneortwo religious leader can be an empowering, uplifting, (and hopefully more) of these strategies for grace-filled, heady, and deepening experience, a self-care, and attend to them deliberately and leader’sroleistoservethecommunity.Tobevery intentionally,youstandamuchbetterchanceof direct, it’s not about you; it’s about the members avoiding stress and burnout and maintaining andfriendsofyourcongregation.Ifyoufindyour- appropriateboundaries. selfbecomingincreasinglyinvestedinissues,rela- First,youcanmeetyourintellectualneedsthrough: tionships,aparticularvision—yourvision—ofthe church’sfutureoryoufindaneedtobeinformed (cid:1) Workshops.EitherthroughtheAssociationand of or to attend most meetings and events, then Unitarian Universalist religious professionals’ it’s time to step back and assess your role. Three events or with groups like the Alban Institute valuablequestionstoaskyourselfare: or FaithTrust Institute, religious leaders have theopportunitytomeetwithotherswhoserve • Whobenefitsfrommyrelationshipand congregationsandhearobjectiveassessment, actions?Whoseneedsarebeingmet? learnfromchallenginginsights,orfeellistened • Whatistheimpactofmyinvolvement tobyapeerorconsultant.It'sagreatoppor- onthecongregation(anditsmission)? tunitytoreality-test,shareyourconcernsand • Whatistheimpactontheperson(s), frustrations, and re-energize and renew your theirfamilyandfriends? vision. Every person needs and wants respect, nur- (cid:1) Congregations.It’sagreatopportunitytoreality- turing, support, caring, and love. Meeting these test, seek the counsel of a consultant, share desiresthroughapositionofleadershipiscross- yourconcernsandchallenges,andre-energize. ing a boundary; when self-esteem needs are met (cid:1) Religious professionals’ committee. Each pro- in this way, the congregation is not served and fessional staff member (minister and/or troubleandstressarelikelytofollow. directorofreligiouseducation)needstohave Finally,somereligiousleadersareattractedto agrouptheycandiscusstheirvision,expecta- others in the congregation. Meeting the need for tions,dailyroutine,andjoysandstressesofthe intimacy in a faith context can create challenges workwith.Forparishministers,somecongre- for any religious leader. For religious profession- gations refer to this group as the Committee als, this is a clear boundary violation and comes on Ministry or the Committee for Profes- with potential issues and problems that can sional Ministry. There are excellent resources destroy careers, relationships, and congrega- available to help with the formation of this tions. It’s simply best if the need for intimacy is committee. The Thomas Jefferson District nevermetinthecongregation. Office, Resource Reader for Committee on Butattractionsdooccur;they’renormal.How Ministryisanexcellentplacetostart.Itcanbe you handle an attraction—an opportunity for foundathttp://www.tjd.uua.org/comreader.html intimacy—makesallthedifference.(See“Sexual (cid:1) Peer groups. Religious leaders, especially reli- AttractionfortheReligiousProfessional.”) giousprofessionals,needtoattendtheirpeer Beingclearaboutboundariesservestheneeds group meetings and gatherings. Staying in of everyone—religious leaders and congregants. touchwithpeersisawaytodemonstrateyour Boundariesareaformofself-care.Stayingaware concern for them and it gives them opportu- and intentional about boundaries will meet the nitiestocareforyou. bestinterestsofall. 36 Self-CareforReligiousLeaders Stayinghealthybymeetingyourphysicalneeds those you are serving while also taking care of can help to sustain your energy and focus and yourownneedsjustwon’talwaysbepossibleand provide an emotional outlet. For some it can it’s not fair to yourself or to the community you evenbeadisciplinedspiritualpractice. servetosplityourattention.Trythefollowing: (cid:1) Exercise. The kinds of physical activity avail- (cid:1) Spiritual practice. Prayer, meditation, journal- able to anyone—from walking to rowing, aer- ing, yoga, and tai chi are just a few of the obics to yoga, swimming to hiking, canoeing ways that many people augment their spiri- toPilates—areastoundingandcanresultina tual life. Having a daily spiritual discipline positiveattitude.Besidesit’sgoodforyou! can be as important to self-care as anything (cid:1) Diet. Like exercise, diet can make a signifi- youdo. cantdifferenceinthewayyoufeel.Ifthisisa (cid:1) Retreats. Whether it’s simply an unstructured challenge,itmightbeworthconsultingwitha couple of days away or an organized, disci- nutritionist. plinedspiritualgetaway,retreatscanbeatime (cid:1) Annualcheck-up.I’malwaysastoundedbythe for deepening reflection, re-kindling and re- energizing the soul, and calming the noise of number of people who can’t remember the everydayroutines.Retreatsareachancetofol- lasttimetheyhadacompletephysicalexami- lowtheun-AmericanZenmaxim,whichcoun- nation.Makeonetodayandplantomakeone sels,“Don’tjustdosomething.Sitthere.” annually. (cid:1) Spiritual director. One sees a traditional psy- Somebasicstrategiesforemotionalself-careare: chotherapistforemotionalsupport;oneworks (cid:1) A mentor. Ask a peer, someone you admire with a spiritual director to become more and trust and preferably (but not necessarily) attuned to the sacred, holy, or transcendent someonewhohasworkedinleadershiplonger Presenceinordertorespondmorefullytolife. than you, to be your mentor. Try to meet with Good self-care and staying aware of and this person on a regular basis for discussion observing boundaries allows religious leaders to andreflection. stayfullyengagedinlife.Whilethecallingtoreli- (cid:1) Support group. Many regional professional giousleadershipispowerful,appealing,anddiffi- groups not only have monthly meetings for culttorefuse,thecalltobeacompleteandwhole their membership but also additional small human being is also powerful and must not be supportgroups.Thesegroupsofferanoppor- ignored. As religious leaders, our congregations tunityforhonestandopentalk(withfeedback expect us to model self-care and balance needs if you want it) about professional and per- anddemandswithawareness.Modelingself-care sonal concerns. Support groups are a won- is a religious practice, and like all such practices, derful way to share what’s on your mind and it is a daily commitment and challenge. E. B inyourheartandmakeclosefriends. Whitespokeeloquentlyaboutbalancingwhenhe (cid:1) Therapy. Traditional psychotherapy is always said, “If the world were merely seductive, that an excellent place to discuss leadership, self- would be easy. If it were merely challenging, that care,andboundarychallenges.Don’twaitfor would be no problem. But I arise in the morning a crisis to occur; make quarterly or semi- torn between a desire to improve (or save) the annualvisitsjusttocheck-in. world and a desire to enjoy (savor) the world. Finally, spiritual self-care, as strange as this Thismakesithardtoplantheday.” may sound, may not be possible in your congre- Butplanwemust.Plantoimproveandenjoy, gational setting. As a religious leader, trying to save and savor. This is our calling. Take care of lead,facilitate,andpromotethespiritualdepthof yourself. Mental,Physical,EmotionalandSpiritualSelf-Care 37 Sexual Attraction for the Religious Professional William W. Finger and Debra W. Haffner Unitarian Universalists affirm that sexuality is Nevertheless, sexual attraction in profes- oneofourmostlife-fulfillingandlife-givinggifts. sional relationships is common, and there are We recognize that our sexuality is central to our particular elements in professional religious humanity and integral to our spirituality. Yet work that may make it even more likely. Outside most religious professionals have little special- of the one-on-one caring and listening environ- ized training in human sexuality, and they may ment, a congregant may be attracted during ser- notbepreparedtodealwiththeinevitablesexual mons, adult education activities, and committee attraction that arises in human relationships, work,respondingeithertoanattractiontemplate particularlyiftheyareattractedtoacongregant. or the power and charisma of the professional. The ethical and legal guidelines for Unitarian (One’s attraction template is a learned response Universalist religious professionals are clear: towhowewillfindsexuallyattractiveandarousing. Married or partnered religious professionals Parts of an attraction template include height, should not engage in sexual contact with congre- weight, physique, which facial features are most gants.Singlereligiousprofessionalscandosoonly important,ethnicity,andsoon.) withextremecare,withthefullknowledgeofkeylay Likewise, religious professionals may find leadersandtransparencyoftherelationship.Sexual themselves sexually attracted to congregants involvement with someone with whom one is with whom they work closely on the board, com- involvedinacounselingrelationshipshouldnever mittees, or activities. It is common for people to occurduringthecounselingrelationship,andafter be attracted to certain people based on experi- termination of the counseling process only if the ences in our past; we each are said to have a religiousprofessionalcandemonstratethatthereis uniqueattractiontemplate. no exploitation inherent in the sexual relationship. When a Religious Professional Thisrequires,ataminimum,thattheprofessional Is Attracted to a Congregant considertheamountoftimethathaspassedsince the counseling relationship ended, the nature and Sexual behavior between a religious professional duration of the counseling relationship, and the and a congregant typically begins with minor likelihood of adverse effects for the particular con- boundary violations. There are a number of warn- gregant. Under no circumstances should a reli- ing signs that can help you recognize when you giousprofessionalterminateacounselingrelation- havesteppedontotheslipperyslopetowardsexual shipinordertoengageacongregantsexually. misconductwithacongregant.Ifyouaredisclosing 38 Self-CareforReligiousLeaders unnecessarypersonalinformationtoacongregant areawareofsexualattraction,continuetomonitor orseekingpersonalandsexualdetailsfromacon- yourverbalandphysicalbehaviorwiththecongre- gregantthatarenotrelevanttopastoralcareneeds, gant,especiallyifpastoralcaresessionsarebeing you should take notice. “Dressing up” when you provided. If you have recognized minor boundary will see a particular congregant or becoming violations, there may be others. Question your excitedattheprospectofseeingaparticularperson motives for asking about sexual behavior, self- atchurchmaybewarningsignsthatyouarefeeling disclosingpersonalinformation,movingcloserto anattraction.Whiletouchingcongregantsmaybea the congregant in a session, or dressing up for a normal part of your style, be aware of a change or session.Questionyourmotivationfortouchingor increase in more intimate touch, such as hugs or giving hugs if this is not consistent with how you kisses, especially if they are selectively offered to a interactwithothercongregants. particularcongregant.Othersignsincludemaking Itisinappropriatetoaskthecongreganttogo additionaltimeforaperson,schedulingextravisits, elsewhere for their faith community because of arranging “chance” meetings, or frequent phone your sexual attraction. However because we calls after hours, except for emergency purposes. often refer to outside therapists and resources While any of these behaviors may be benign, it is when an issue arises that exceeds our expertise, naïvetodenythattheymaybemotivatedbyattrac- it may be appropriate and safer to refer the con- tion. Objectively examining the motivations for gregant to a community therapist. It is your these behaviors is the first step in avoiding sexual responsibility to deal with these feelings; never exploitationofacongregant.Betterto“praiseGod referapersonsothatyoucanpursueapersonal that such vitality existed, and then let go of it,” as romanticand/orsexualrelationshipwiththem. KarenandRonalLebacqzquoteonestudyrespon- dentputtingitintheirbookSexintheParish. When a Congregant Is Attracted Thereareanumberofappropriateresponsesto to a Religious Professional take if you become aware of sexual attraction to a congregant. First, acknowledge these feelings to Althoughthemajorityofsexualcontactinpsycho- yourself, but do not share these feelings with your therapeutic relationshipsis initiated by therapists, congregant. Knowledge of the attraction will only studiessuggestthat15to25percentofsexualcon- put the congregant in an awkward and potentially tact in therapeutic relationships is initiated by vulnerable situation, and such a revelation will clients.Althoughwedonotknowofacomparable irreparablydamagetheprofessionalrelationship.If studywithreligiousprofessionals,wecanassume you need to discuss these feelings with someone, that the percentages are similar. However it is no seekadviceorconsultationfromapeer,supervisor, moreappropriatetoactinresponsetothisattrac- oryourownspiritualdirectorortherapist.Doingso tion than it is to initiate the contact yourself. may reduce the likelihood that you will act on the Congregants may act seductively because that is feelings. Second, do not act on feelings of sexual howtheyinteractintheireverydayrelationshipsor attraction.Whilethismayseemobvious,mostsex- becausetheyseeknurtureandattention.Theymay ual transgressions are committed because time is respond to your caring and concern, your pulpit not taken to explore the dynamics contributing to presence,yourpower,oryourcharisma.Theymay theattraction.Whilerefrainingfromsexualcontact, fantasizethatyouareapersonwithspecialinsight it is important to continue to express non-sexual and aptitude for caring. They may view your love caring for the congregant. It is not appropriate to for your congregants as meaning that you love withdrawfromacongregantbecauseofyoursexual them personally and unconditionally. Others may attraction,ortoavoidthematcoffeehourorsocial use sexuality to restore the imbalance created by events.Religiousprofessionalswhodosoleavethe therelationship.Congregantswithahistoryofsex- congregantfeelingpuzzledandrejected.Onceyou ual abuse or exploitative relationships may be SexualAttractionfortheReligiousProfessional 39 repeating this behavior or testing for safety. youmaynotwanttorevealthecongregant’sname. Regardless, responding to this seduction is Religious professionals may be flattered and unethical, anti-therapeutic, and damaging to the even aroused by expressions of attraction, or they congregant. mayfeelthreatened,uncomfortable,andoffended. Acongregant’sattractionmaybeovertorsub- Regardlessoftheemotionalreaction,thereligious tle.Congregantswithanexcessiveinterestinyour professional’sresponsemustremainprofessional. privatelife,includingyourmaritalordatingstatus, Acknowledging mutual attraction or responding may be interested in personalizing the relation- sexually to the attraction are not options for the ship. Congregants may seek this information married religious professional or a professional directly or indirectly through contacts with other who is counseling a congregant. A single religious congregation staff and congregants. Physical professionalwhoisnotofferingthepersonpastoral signs of attraction such as body position, reveal- caresessionscandosoonlywithstrictsafeguards. ing attire, seductive poses, self-grooming, and When confronted with sexual attraction, what “accidental” touch may be indications of attrac- youdon’tdoisasimportantaswhatyoudo.Don’t tion.Verbalstatementsofattractionmaybedirect ignore apparent feelings of attraction and don’t or may consist of flattery (of your professional criticize the congregant for expressing their feel- skills or attractiveness), compliments, or unnec- ings. Don’t appear shocked or surprised. Don’t essary revelation of sexual exploits or unmet sex- shamethecongregantanddon’tabandonthecon- ual needs in a pastoral care session. Attempts to gregant by avoiding him or her in public gather- modify the context of the relationship may also ings. However, if the attraction continues, it may indicate ulterior motives. Gifts, frequent phone beappropriatetorecommendthatthecongregant calls,“chance”meetings,orrequestsformorefre- seekaprofessionaltherapistinthecommunityfor quent or longer sessions or meetings outside of ongoing counseling, just as a religious profes- thecongregationmayindicateattraction. sionalwouldforothermentalhealthissuesbeyond The congregant may not be consciously aware their expertise. A congregant who has expressed of the attraction, or only vaguely aware of it, and sexual interest in a religious professional in a may deny the attraction if confronted. If the con- social setting, has been told such a relationship gregantraisesthisissuedirectlyincounseling,itis cannot happen, and then asks for a private pas- importantthatyoustateunambiguouslythatasex- toralcaresession,shouldbetoldthatatherapistin ualrelationshipcannotandwillnotoccur.Express the community or other religious professional that commitment kindly but firmly: “Thank you, would better address their needs. In such a situa- but because of my position, that cannot occur.” tion, if the congregant insists on a meeting, be Documentation of such expression by a congre- suretotakeappropriatemeasures,suchasleaving gant—orapersistentsenseofsuchattraction—is thedoorajarandnotifyingaGoodOfficerscontact critical and consultation is highly recommended. personortrustedpeerinadvance.Ifthecongrega- While sexual expression may be benign, congre- tion has more than one religious professional, gants who feel rejected may be angry and eventu- referthecongreganttooneofthemforcounseling. allyretaliate.Professionalsareinavulnerableposi- Theimportantpointisthatsexualattractionis tion whenever sexual issues arise, and early and common in religious professional relationships. thorough documentation and informing a peer or Theissueisnotwhetheryouareattractedtoacon- supervisor can reduce potential liability. Contact gregant, but how you respond to it ethically and the Good Officers person of your professional professionally.It’snotenoughtotellreligiouspro- chapter and ask them to document the conversa- fessionals“never”andexpectthattobesufficient. tion. You may also want to talk with your sup- Just like everyone else, religious professional are port/relations committee and the chair of the sexualbeings;weneedtoexpressourownsexual- Board of Trustees, although for privacy purposes, itywithholinessandintegrity. 40 Self-CareforReligiousLeaders ReligiousEducationandSafety Upholding Trust in the Religious Education Community Tera Little and Laurel Amabile Helping someone learn how to say “yes” to life, Weplaceahighpriorityonincludingchildrenand despite the pains and travails each of us experi- youthwithinourfaithcommunities.Ourreligious ences, is one of the most important gifts our education programs for children find myriad Unitarian Universalist congregations offer. This ways to help incorporate them and teach them “yes” is at the core of our lifespan religious edu- abouthowourcongregationswork.Preschoolers cation programsand we convey it in many ways, go through the curriculum Chalice Children. through sermons, small group ministry, our dis- Elementary school children learn about our UU cussions in committee meetings, and religious Principles through curricula such as We Believe, education classes. “Yes” flows through the heart and many of our middle school students com- of our faith, calling on us to stand up, dig deep plete a comprehensive Coming of Age program, withinourselves,andleteffervescentlifeemerge. where they learn in depth about our denomina- Manyofourreligiousleadersfindthatanother tion,ourrichhistory,andthecolorfulbackground waytoannouncetheir“yes”isbysettingupclear and norms of their home congregation. This limitations and expectations, responsibility, and often culminates in the participant’s becoming a accountability. More and more of our congrega- memberofthecongregation.Thecomprehensive tions recognize the need to create and maintain lifespan sexuality education series Our Whole clear safety requirements in which we leave no Livesoffersexcellentresourcesforfiveagelevels— room for doubt in our expectations of healthy grades K–1, grades 4–6, grades 7–9, grades relationships and boundaries between adults 10–12, and adult—on topics of body and gender and children and between adults and adults. We awareness, healthy sexuality and relationships, can’t leave to chance our interactions with the respect for self and others, self-care, and abuse childreninourchurch,assumingthateverything prevention. willbeallrightbecauseweareallgoodUnitarian Attention can also be given to promoting Universalists. These safety requirements help us healthy and respectful relationships among chil- live out our collective covenant espoused in our dren. Adults can model healthy interpersonal UnitarianUniversalistPrinciplesthatwesharein behaviors and educate children about peer ourcommunitiesoffaith. issues like bullying and psychological and physi- OurPrinciplescallustowardjusticeandright calabuse.Sometimesthisentailsadultinterven- relationship,andwemustliveoutthisvalueinter- tion when these hurtful behaviors occur in the nallywiththepeopleinourpewsandclassrooms. faithcommunity. UpholdingTrustintheReligiousEducationCommunity 41 Our compelling programs for children and culture shift within your congregation. Do not youthentailahighdegreeofresponsibilityforthe ignore the power of this. Even by just beginning adults working directly and peripherally with the the process, you are fomenting a new way of young people. All of us in the congregation teach doing things and elevating the level of profes- our children not just how to be Unitarian Univer- sionalism,faith,andtrustinthecongregation. salists but perhaps more importantly, how to live Prevention inaUnitarianUniversalistcommunity,acommu- nity that gives to, cares for, critiques, affirms, Whatdowemeanwhenwesaywewanttocreatea questions,andblessesthosewithinitsfold. safe religious education program for all ages? At Thus, for a people who expect their adults to theoutset,thisnotionmayfeeloverwhelmingand be faith-keepers, trust-builders, and care-givers, you may not know exactly where to start. Many itiseasytoseewhyitissoimportantforustobe congregations have codified their safety policies clear about how adults interact with children. and procedures. Samples from various congrega- Our responsibility to spiritually and emotionally tions are included in the UUA Safety/ Abuse nurture the children in our community is huge. ClearinghouseResourcePacket(availablethrough With the stakes so high, we must not fail to theUUALifespanFaithDevelopmentDepartment guard them adequately against physical and and the UUA Office of Ethics and Safety). Many emotionalabuse.Willwesafeguardagainstevery UUA districts now have district safety policies. perceivableabuse?Thisisnotlikely.However,we These are excellent places to begin. Reading can significantly reduce the risk by creating and throughthesepoliciesprovidesagoodoverviewof followingpreventativepolicies. what types of issues need to be covered. In addi- When we create explicit guidelines for appro- tion, there are many places on the Internet where priate behavior we define the values that are youcanfindin-depthinformationaboutcreatinga important to us as religious people. Our state- safe religious education environment. One exam- mentsaboutsaferelationshipscreateastructure ple is Church Mutual Insurance Company, in which our religious community can thrive. www.churchmutual.com, an insurer of many Many congregations have already begun this UnitarianUniversalistcongregationsanddistricts. important work. Perhaps you have done prelimi- We must keep our children and youth physi- nary work in contacting your district office, the cally, emotionally, and sexually safe. Looking out UUA,oryourinsurancecompanytolookatsam- for their physical safety means that we ensure ple safety policies and collect resources. Your thatuniversalprecautionsarefollowedwhenhan- congregation may have already completed such dling bodily fluids (see the sample policy on the policies and working on revising and updating UUA web site), and that driver safety measures them.Whereveryouareonthisjourney,wecom- areinplaceforallfieldtripdrivers.Reducingrisk mendyou.Youaredoingimportantwork. meansthattheplaygroundequipmentfollowsall As a religious leader in your congregation, state requirements and that regular emergency whether paid or volunteer, you are called to seek evacuation drills are routine. Reducing risk and the truth and to speak the truth in love. Talking ensuring safety requires an audit of the facilities about appropriate behavior between adults and to make certain there is nothing in the physical children,betweenyouthandyouth,andbetween spacethatcancauseharm. adults and adults may feel difficult, especially Unitarian Universalist congregations often when you have long-term volunteers and every- share their space with the community. In these one knows everyone. You may feel as if people instances we must be vigilant about safety in willviewthisasaccusatoryortroublemaking.Itis order to deter possible litigation due to negli- importanttobeawarethatbycreatingandfollow- gence. In one congregation a community group ingthroughonsuchpolicies,youaregeneratinga arranged with the church office to rent the 42 ReligiousEducationandSafety religious education program space for an Creating a space that is emotionally and sexu- evening program. After they had used the space, ally safe for children and youth is more complex. a member of the group contacted the religious Therearepersonnelissuesaboutwhoisappropri- educatorandinformedherthatherchildfellfrom ate to work with children and youth; decisions the playground equipment. The child was not about how the workers are screened; what is seriously injured, but in researching the new reportable; and who communicates with outside recommended standards for public playgrounds, authoritieswhennecessary. thecallerinformedthereligiouseducatorthatthe churchplaygrounddidnotmeetthosestandards. Volunteers The religious educator handled the situation As a religious professional, elected official, or vol- immediately,whichisimportantinrespondingto unteer staff in a congregation, it falls to you to any safety issue. She first discovered that the ensure that all children and youth in your congre- playground had been built before the current gation are adequately protected against potential playground standards had been changed; harm.Tooofteninourchurcheswearehungryfor because the playground did not meet the stan- volunteers to work with children and youth, and dards it was a potential liability issue. The reli- when an enthusiastic person presents herself, we gious educator immediately reported the prob- rush to get her involved in the program, glad to lem to the minister, staff, and nursery school havefilledanothervolunteerslot.Whilethereisno staff, who quickly started work to bring the play- failsafewaytoensureyouwillhaveappropriatevol- grounduptocurrentstandards. unteers, there are several steps you can take to Fortunatelytherewasnolegalactioninvolved maximizeyourchancesoffindingthebestpeople in this incident, but the congregation learned possible. several important lessons. When a community To reduce the risk of abuse; protect children, group or anyone else who is not familiar uses youth,andadults;andpromotehealthandsafety the playground and an accident happens, the inyourcongregation,followthesebasicguidelines: congregation must be responsive to the situa- • Recruit religious education volunteers who tion and follow up with all necessary calls and have been members of your congregation for procedures, documenting how the incident is at least six months. This allows individuals handled. The leaders learned that rental groups and families to gain an understanding of need to be informed about all playground safety Unitarian Universalism and integrate them- rulesandthoserulesneedtobepostedinavisi- selvesintothelifeoftheCongregation. ble space and verbally discussed with the rental • Orient and train all religious education volun- group. The church needs to know in advance teers in the religious education program, poli- that rental groups who have children’s activities cies, and procedures by providing a packet of willalsoprocureadequatesupervision.Thecon- materials that includes a yearly calendar, child gregation handled this situation well by being and faith development information, sugges- responsiveandproactive. tions for religious education teachers, educa- Congregation leaders can be proactive with tion and support opportunities, and religious accidentpreventionbyconductingathoroughfacil- educationsafetypoliciesandprocedures. itiessafetyinspectionandassessmentprocess.A numberofresourcesareavailableforthispurpose, • Have all church staff and volunteers working in cludinganonlineplaygroundsafetybookletavai- with children and youth review and sign a lable on the Church Mutual website and safety copy of the UUA Code of Ethics for Adults and inspection checklists that you can buy from WorkingwithChildrenandYouth(everyyear) the Christian Ministries Resources Webstore at andkeepsignedcopiesonfile. www.gospelcom.net/cgicmr/webstoreweb_store.cgi. UpholdingTrustintheReligiousEducationCommunity 43 • Codify and make official (by governing board workers, full-time or part-time, compensated or sanctionorvote)anypoliciesandprocedures volunteer, including professional religious lead- inplacerelatedtosafety. ers (ministers, religious educators, and music • Institute Universal Precautions for infectious directors): diseases, handling of bodily fluids, etc. (espe- • Givetheapplicantafulljobdescription ciallynurseryandtoddlercaregivers). • Keepapplicationformsonfile.Theseforms • Establishanemergencyevacuationprocedure mustincludeinformationsuchaspersonal (schedulepracticedrillsatleastonceayear). history,churchhistory,educationalback- • Clearly define behavior and safety expecta- ground,andworkandvolunteerexperience. tions for children, youth, and adults, both • Requiretwoorthreereferencesfromeach inside and outside of the church building applicantandcheckthem,preferablyby (suchasplaygroundsafetyprocedures). phonebutemailisacceptable. • Askparentstosignamedicalreleaseformfor • Createformsasummarizingthepersonal all off-site field trips or church-sponsored interviewwiththeapplicant. activitiesandprovidecopiestoassigneddriv- • Requireeachapplicanttocompleteacon- ersorchaperones. sentformforacriminalbackgroundcheck. • Requirewrittenapplicationsandconductper- • Obtainconfirmationthatthecriminalback- sonal reference checks for mentors of youth groundcheckiscomplete. orvolunteerswhoworkwithchildrenoryouth in a congregation-sponsored role outside of • Keepalloftheserecordsinaconfidentialfile thechurch,suchasComingofAgementors. once youhavemadethehire. • Reviewyourcongregation’slegalresponsibili- A secondary screening procedure may be ties regarding equipment, property, and per- used for occasional volunteer workers who are sonalsafety. church members for at least six months. Ask • Inspect your insurance policy to determine applicantstocompleteanapplicationandvolun- who empowers all non-ordained staff and/or tary disclosure statement, conduct a personal volunteers in their scopes of responsibility. interview, and institute and enforce a clear Doesthegoverningboard? churchpolicythatatleasttwoadultswillbepres- entwithchildrenandyouthatalltimes. • Know how claims are handled in the event of It is time for us to take the role of volunteer- a playground accident or a car accident ing with children and youth and adults seriously involvingastafforvolunteerdriver. andtosendamessagethatwenolongerhavean • Consult with a lawyer and your congrega- open door policy for volunteer positions. We tion’s insurance representative for further want the absolute best people working with the clarificationandrecommendations. entire population in our congregations. Many • Contact your state officials about the exis- other organizations have professionalized the tence of “Good Samaritan” provisions that process of hiring volunteers. Our congregations mayprotectvolunteersduringtheirserviceto mustdothisaswell. yourorganization. Manyabuserslookforsituationsinwhichthey • Document incidents or reports of injuries or are isolated and able to prey more easily on their accidentsandkeepthemonfile. victims. Precautions can include ensuring that classroom doors have windows to increase visi- The following primary screening procedure bility. A policy that at least two adults will always shouldbeusedintherecruiting/screening/hir- beintheroomwithchildrenalsoreducestherisk ing process for all applicants and congregation 44 ReligiousEducationandSafety