CongregationandCulture Healthy and Safe Congregations Qiyamah A. Rahman Many Unitarian Universalists share Dr. Martin for the early awareness about child safety in ou Luther King Jr.’s vision of Beloved Community. congregations can be attributed to the good Our Principles, which reflect on the intercon- instincts and deep caring of our religious educa- nectednessoflife—thesignificanceofsocialjus- tion professionals, the UUA Religious Education tice, democracy, equality, and our search for Department,andtheLiberalReligiousEducators truth—reflect those values that so many of us Association. yearn for and seek to live out in community. But another risk factor was equally real and Efforts to identify and address factors that com- tooklongertodetect—clergysexualmisconduct. promise the safety of our Beloved Community Several factors pushed the issue into the light of have given rise to new and challenging initia- day. The increase in the numbers of female min- tives, such as safe congregations and right rela- isters in our UU movement, coupled with the tions.Thesearefairlynewtermsthatcontinueto heightenedsensibilityoffemaleinternsandmin- evolve as we expand our understanding about isters who had experienced clergy sexual abuse, what it means to be in covenantal relationships provided a strong incentive to challenge some within a community of Unitarian Universalists peopleandremoveothersfromourprofessional that shares vastly different theologies and ranks. In addition, the larger women’s move- beliefs. The Unitarian Universalist Association ment and the Women and Religion movement book titled Creating Safe Congregations: Toward captured the collective voices and concerns of An Ethic of Right Relations singularly addresses UU women. This combined momentum over the two most common risk factors that pose time that produced a climate ripe for truth potential and actual threats to congregational telling. The courageous action of victims who safety—compromised child safety and clergy came forward, demanding accountability, led to sexual abuse. When Creating Safe Congregations the development of policies and procedures waspublished,societyreflectedveryclearguide- namingsinsandevilsthatmanyUUswereoften lines about appropriate contact with children afraid to name. To name them might mean and we had many good examples and protocols acknowledging the illusion of safety. While we todrawfrom.Thuswemadegreatstridesinour understand the reluctance to name the lack of efforts to pinpoint child safety, what we believed safetyinourmidst,wecannotaffordtostickour it should look like, and how it might be accom- headsinthesandlikeostriches.Instead,wehave plishedinourcongregations.Muchofthecredit tobewillingtobeinfluencedbythefacts. HealthyandSafeCongregations 1 Our congregations must experience a cultural Muir not only provides an historical perspective shiftinordertoengageeffectivelyinaconversation on covenants, but also includes examples of about healthy and safe congregations. We must covenants that have honored the rich diversity of create the necessary context. This conversation ourcongregations.Leadershipisoftenfacedwith requires the courage of our ministers, lay lead- issues of confidentiality, privacy, and anonymity. ers,staff,andmembers.Itrequireseachindivid- While there might be implicit understandings ual to bravely bring his or her whole self to the about these challenging issues, difficulty discussion. We can begin by telling the truth. distinguishing between healthy and unhealthy Thisworkbookrepresentsanopportunitytocon- secrets can pose challenges for all leaders and tinuethesacredworkbynamingtheissues,thus congregations.RebeccaEdmiston-Lange’sessay, reconceptualizing healthy congregations to “BoundariesandConfidentiality,”helpsusreach include a range of behaviors that compromise clarity about the different kinds of secrets and thesafetyofourcommunities. apply issues of confidentiality more appropri- Patricia Hoertdoerfer’s essay, “Toward an ately.“Mental,Physical,Emotional,andSpiritual UnderstandingandFaithfulResponse,”reminds Self-Care,” while written especially for religious usthatourfaith“callsustopracticeourrelational professionals, is equally applicable to lay lead- theologybyrespectingtheworthofeveryperson ers.FredricMuirrecommendsself-careasaway... while honoring the wholeness of life... by topreventbehaviorsthatmayresultinboundary doingnoharmandactingresponsibly.”Kenneth violations. He provides a helpful definition to Hurtousessystemstheorytohelpusthinkabout educate and engage the reader and identifies the creation of authentic, balanced, and mean- some common boundary violations, leaving no ingfulrelationships.Heurgesustorememberthat confusing gray areas. Supplementing this essay transitional times stir things up and produces isapiecebyWilliamFingerandDebraHaffner,who thepotentialforbothconflictandcreativethink- are to be commended for tackling a difficult but ing. Learning how to be a non-anxious presence important issue head-on in their essay titled andpracticingthisskillisaworthygoal. “Sexual Attraction for the Religious Professional.” Phyllis Rickter and Betty Hoskins examine the Theiradvicetoreligiousprofessionalsonexpres- subjectofleadershipin“LeadingaCommunityin singsexualityencourages“holinessandintegrity.” RightRelations.”Theysuggestthateffectivelead- Theirconcreteexamplesprovideguidancetothe ershipfacilitatesrightrelationsandsafecongrega- readerwhileputtingafaceonthechallengesand tions.Butthisrequiresawillingnesstoengagein issuesthatreligiousprofessionalsconfront. opendiscussionandfurtherthedevelopmentofa TeraLittleandLaurelAmabilecallonreadersto, covenantalcommunityofrightrelations,thusfos- “standup,digdeep,andletlifeemerge.”Asreli- tering a culture of safety. Ken Brown and Angela giouseducationprofessionals,theyurgeustoset Merkert round off the presentation on leadership upclearlimitationsandexpectationsandnotleave with “Leadership with Vision.” They share eight tochanceourinteractionswiththechildreninour characteristics of strong congregational leader- church,norassumethateverythingwillbeallright ship and conclude, “If we truly want to develop because we are all good Unitarian Universalists. and be transformational leaders, we need to take Their central tenant is love, which causes us to seriouslytheresponsibilityformakingourcongre- be good stewards and work to create safety in gations safe for all.” Covenants have become a our congregations. Their insights are invaluable, meaningful and explicit tool to structure congre- regardless of where readers might find them- gational relations, especially as it affects leader- selvesintheprocess.DebraHaffner’s“Balancing ship.Theessay“WritingaCovenant”fullyexplores Compassion and Protection” requires the reader the use of covenant as a means of achieving to hold both the victim and perpetrators in a health and safety in congregational life. Fredric spaceofjustice,compassion,accountability,and 2 CongregationandCulture safety.Shereviewsinformationaboutchildsafety more inclusive vision of healthy and safe congre- thatisequallyhelpfulforthenoviceandthemore gations. Debra Haffner’s essay, “Toward a Vision experienced reader. Haffner’s stories from the of Sexually Healthy Faith Communities,” invites trenches about lay leaders and clergy, grappling ustolookdeeper,reachfarther,andbecomeever with sex offenders, and other real issues are more faithful to our prophetic and pastoral compelling. She offers steps to take to keep or UnitarianUniversalistfaith. remove individuals whose past and present Mayourworkcontinuetoinspirethecreative behaviors may pose a threat to community and energiesofcommunity,becauseastheFaithTrust someexamplesaboutwhatothershavedone. Instituteremindsus,“Ourfaithcommunitiesare SarahGibbbelievesthatworkingtowardasafe sanctuariesofsafetyworthyofourtrust.” congregation is an important vehicle for evangel- ismbecausethe“opportunitytocreateandenforce safety policies is an opportunity to strengthen Unitarian Universalism.” Her “Creating Policies withYouthGroups”shouldberecommendedread- ingforallyouthdirectorsandadvisors. The essay titled “Just Relations in a Faith Context” uses the seven elements of justice mak- ingdescribedbyMarieFortune,awell-knownmin- ister and activist. In this section, Fredric Muir demonstrates how our Unitarian Universalist Principles and sacred scriptures support a para- digm for just relations in a UU faith context. Tracey Robinson-Harris’s “Working for Safety and to End Oppression” links justice, safety, and anti-oppression efforts and explores the need to “develop cultural competency that allows us to speakoutofourownexperienceandlistentothe experienceofotherswithoutlabelingorredefining it.”Sheassertsthatcreatinghealthyandsafecon- gregations allows everyone to bring their whole selves to religious life. Anna Belle Leiserson’s and Phil Thomason’s essay, “Healing,” addresses the woundednessandbrokennessthatweexperience when clergy sexual abuse occurs. They speak to the healing that is necessary to rebuild trust and includeacompellingcasestudy. This new program about healthy and safe congregationsrepresentsatruereconceptualiza- tion of our work. That is, it moves us closer to addressing the intersection of diverse behaviors and relationships that promote safety and integrity in our efforts to build Beloved Com- munity. It names those factors that compromise the safety of our communities and concludes with a final challenge and invitation toward a HealthyandSafeCongregations 3 Toward an Understanding and Faithful Response Patricia Hoertdoerfer We live in a culture of violence. The Children’s this disrespectful, uncivil behavior is not con- Defense Fund reported in 2003 that every day fronted andaddressed, it becomes accepted and 2,140 babies are born in poverty, nearly 12 chil- condoned. We must name the abusive behavior dren and youth under the age of 20 die from in its many forms, overcome the secrecy and firearms, 218 young people are arrested for vio- shame,andaddressinterpersonalviolence.Until lent crimes, 144 children are abused and neg- all relationshipsbetween young and old, black lected,and5,760womenarebattered.Welivein andwhite,gayandstraight,richandpoor,liberal a world of hate crimes and teen suicides, violent andconservativecanberespectfulandhealthy; music videos and video games, high school noneofusissafe. shootings, and Internet pornography. Violence Ourreligiousheritages—Unitarian,Universalist, permeates American life from the private sphere andUnitarianUniversalist—compelustoaddress tothepublicarena.Weareacountryborninvio- the important, widespread, and complex social lence and continually formed in violence—the issues of abuse and interpersonal violence. violence of conquest, colonization, conversion, Physical, emotional, sexual, or spiritual abuse; and civilization. The macrocosm of American sexual exploitation; partner abuse; child abuse; cultureandhistoryisreflectedinthemicrocosm andelderabuse—allprofoundlyaffectallpartici- offaithcommunitiesandUUcongregations. pants by diminishing human dignity and free Each day we read news stories detailing the choice.Inourreligiouscommunitiesbreachesof latest allegations and arrests of sexual abuse, trust,faith,andsafetyinourcongregationsunder- clergy misconduct, and acquaintance rape in mine the foundations of our personal and com- communities across our country. This culture munalcovenants. hasenteredourlives,ourcommunities,andour Our faith demands our service in promoting congregations. Family conversations and con- and creating communities of peace, love, and gregational discussions often take on violent justice for all. Our faith calls us to practice our languageandheatedrhetoricinappropriatefora relational theology by respecting the worth of UU family or a faith community. It happens in every person and the sacredness of every per- UU households or congregations when one per- son’s sexuality while honoring the wholeness of son offers a different perspective or asks a diffi- life in the interdependent web of existence of cult question, when one member passionately which we are a part. Our faith calls us to treat takes a position or accepts a leadership role. If others with justice, equality, and compassion 4 CongregationandCulture while we work to create environments, locally (cid:1) Physical abuse is deliberate and intentional and globally, that lend themselves to modeling harm to the body of a child, youth, adult, or liberty, peace, and justice in human interactions. elder. Examples may include violent battery Our faith calls us to act in ways that foster well- withaweapon(suchasaknifeorbelt),burn- being in ourselves and others by doing no harm ing, choking, fracturing bones, and other and acting responsibly to create communities non-accidentalinjuries. and institutions that are safe and nonviolent. (cid:1) Emotional abuse is harm that deeply affects a Finally, our faith calls us to be courageous and child’s,youth’s,adult’s,orelder’sself-esteem. committed leaders in the ongoing search for Thistypeofabuseexposesthepersontospo- truthandmeaning,spiritualfreedom,andethical ken and/or unspoken violent language and responsibility. emotionalcruelty. Interpersonal violence is a form of dehuman- (cid:1) Sexual abuse is the use, inducement, or coer- ization in our society perpetuated by those with cionofachild,youth,adult,orelderbyanother poweroverotherswhouseintimidation,coercion, person,whoisusuallyolderandmorepower- threats,deceit,isolation,sexuality,andprivilegeto ful, to engage in sexual conduct. Examples of dominate and control. This violence is physical, sexual abuse include fondling, intercourse, emotional,sexual,social,economic,cultural,spir- incest, exploitation, and exposure to pornog- itual, and/or political behavior used to harm, raphyand/orprostitution. oppress,andcontrolchildren,youth,women,and (cid:1) Neglectoccurswhenaparent,relative,orcare- men. In Sexual Violence: The Unmentionable Sin, giver endangers a child’s, youth’s, adult’s, or MarieFortunewritesthatinterpersonalviolenceis elder’s health, welfare, and safety through asymptomofsocialconditionsthatmaintainthe negligence. It may include withholding food, imbalanceofpowerandsocietalprivilege. medical care, affection, or proper living quar- Abuse and sexual violence can take many tersforalongtime. forms, including rape, sexual abuse, incest, sex- ualharassment,familyviolence,andchildabuse. Abusers use their power—their age, physical It is impossible to obtain complete and accurate strength, authority, knowledge, and resources— data, but FBI researchers estimate that one in to take unfair advantage of their victims. fourgirlsandoneinsixboysare sexuallyabused Without some kind of intervention, the violence beforetheyturnsixteen,andthat75to95percent usuallygetsworse.Forexample,verbal/emotional oftheseabusedchildrenarevictimizedbysome- abuse may start as name-calling and criticizing, one they know—a sibling, parent, stepparent, escalatetoyellingandhumiliation,andendwith cousin, uncle or aunt, grandparent, neighbor, or the victim’s suicide. Sexual abuse may begin teacher. The vast majority of abusers are adults withunwantedtouchingorviewingpornographic on whom the victims are dependent, physically pictures, escalate to sexual talk and forced sex, and emotionally. The National Clearinghouse on andendinrape. Child Abuse and Neglect reports that 3 million Sexualassaultistheactofforcingorthreaten- incidents of abuse were reported in the United ingapersontoengageinanunwantedsexualact. Statesin2000.Asshockingasthisnumberis,the (cid:1) Rapeissimplydefinedas“forcedsex.”Stranger total number of children and youth involved in rape is perpetuated by a person unknown to these reported incidents is closer to 5 million. the child, youth, adult, or elder assaulted. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Marital rape or spousal rape is inflicted by a Services estimates that 6 million more incidents marriage partner, usually the husband. gounreportedeachyear. Coercion sex involves “consent” that is at Abuse—themisuseofpowerinarelationship least partly motivated by fear that rape will tomanipulate,control,orhurt—takesmanyforms: otherwiseoccur. TowardanUnderstandingandFaithfulResponse 5 (cid:1) Acquaintance rape and date rape are similar. Safe Sanctuaries Thesetermsdescriberapeofanacquaintance. While a faith community cannot guarantee the The perpetrator may be a family member or safety of every person, every UU congregation datingpartner. can be responsible for reducing the risk and (cid:1) Incest is sexual intercourse between two per- eliminatingthecircumstancesthatleadtoharm. sonstoocloselyrelatedtolegallymarry. Leaders and members need to work together to (cid:1) Sexual harassment is any unwelcome sexual ensure that the congregation’s covenant and advances, requests for sexual favors, or mission are carried out in responsibly safe cir- other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual cumstances. Congregations must remember the nature. The Equal Employment Opportunity pledge made to all children during their dedica- Commission defines sexual harassment as tion ceremonies and the celebration of all youth the use of one’s authority or power, either duringtheirComingofAgeservices. explicitly or implicitly, to coerce another into TheworkofUUcongregationsistocreateand unwanted sexual relations or the creation of preserve the safety and trust in which spiritual an intimidating, hostile, or offensive envi- growth and ethical action can occur. Violations ronment through verbal or physical conduct of trust fracture a faith community and destroy ofasexualnature. the basis of ministry. Ministers are bound by Acquaintancerapeandsexualharassmentare their calling and lay leaders are bound by their formsofsexualization,theuseofsexualitytoinflu- covenant to lead faithfully and guard the safety ence, manipulate, or control others. Stereotypes of the congregation for all members. A sexual ofgender-rolebehaviorsstronglypromotesexual relationship or sexualized behavior between a harassmentandacquaintancerape. minister and a congregant is an abuse of clergy Thesevariousformsofinterpersonalexploita- powerandisinappropriate.Nocongregationcan tion can range from harmless manipulation afford—spiritually, ethically, legally, or finan- (flirting) to extreme violence (rape). The term cially—to fail to live up to its covenant of trust sexualized behavior includes various forms of by implementing strategies for reducing and touch and other physical and verbal behavior preventingabuseandinterpersonalviolence. and refers to words, touches, or actions that Domestic Violence communicate sexual interest. Sexual harass- mentisbydefinitionabusive.Sexualizedbehav- Domestic violence is the mistreatment of one ior is in itself neutral. It becomes good or bad, family member by another. In Violence in the appropriate or inappropriate, as a result of the Family, Marie Fortune states that domestic vio- balance or imbalance of power in the relation- lence refers to a pattern of violent and coercive ship and/or the presence or absence of choice. behavior exercised by one adult in an intimate But this concept of sexualized behavior is com- relationship over another. Most often perpetra- plexbecauseitvariesbetweenculturesaswellas tors of abuse and battering are spouses, ex- betweensubcultures.Forexample,forawoman spouses, boyfriends, ex-boyfriends, or lovers. to meet a man’s gaze is considered provocative Most often victims of this kind of abuse are in some cultures whereas in other cultures, it is womenandchildren.Theabusecanbephysical, neutral or confrontational. For males to hold sexual, verbal, emotional, economic, and psy- hands is considered an indication of sexual chological. Domestic violence is a problem of interest and/or homosexual orientation in epidemic proportions in our country and in our mainstream North American culture, whereas communities.Everyfifteenseconds,awomanin in other cultures it is routine and conveys noth- the U.S. experiences the terror and humiliation ingaboutsexualorientation. of being battered by a spouse or partner, and 6 CongregationandCulture 2 to 4 million women are assaulted each year by Myth2 Theproblemisnotreallywomanabuse.It their husbands or boyfriends. In 2000, 1,247 isspouseabuse.Womenarejustasviolentasmen. womenwerekilledbyintimatepartners.Thatsame Fact In over 95 percent of domestic assaults, year, 440 men were killed by an intimate partner, the man is the perpetrator. To end domestic vio- accordingtotheU.S.DepartmentofJustice. lence, we must scrutinize why it is usually men AsUUleaderswemustteachthatviolenceis who are violent in partnerships. We must exam- notanappropriatewaytohandleconflict.Clergy ine the historic and legal permission that men are present as officiates and symbols at almost havebeengiventobeviolentingeneralandtobe every significant rite of passage and occurrence violent toward their wives and children specifi- inthelivesofourcongregants.Layleadersfillan cally.Therearerarecasesinwhichawomanbat- unparalleled role in offering care, healing, and tersaman.Batteringdoesoccurinsomelesbian hope to abused women, men, children, and eld- andgaymalerelationships. ers. Our help must include compassionate car- Myth3 When there is violence in the family, all ing,practicalguidance,andnurturingfaith. members of the family are participating in the UU clergy and lay leaders can become more dynamic, and therefore all must change for the knowledgeableaboutfamilyviolenceandrespond violencetostop. appropriately.Wemustacknowledgebothsecular Fact Onlytheperpetratorhastheabilitytostop awareness and religious concerns. We need to the violence. Many women who are battered identifyhowtheissuesofdiversetheology,ethnic- makenumerousattemptstochangetheirbehav- ity,age,andcommunitydefine(andparticularize) iorinthehopethatthiswillstoptheabuse.This the characteristics of family violence. Family does not work. Changes in family members’ Violence and Religion: An Interfaith Resource Guide behavior will not cause or influence the batterer teachesusthatwithgreaterknowledgeandunder- tobenonviolent. standing, we can resist evil, protect the harmed, andaffirmthepurposeoffamilies. Myth4 Domesticviolenceisusuallyaone-time In breaking the silence about family violence, event,anisolatedincident. religious professionals and lay leaders need to Fact Battering is a pattern, a reign of force and nameitforwhatitisandbecomepropheticvoices terror. Once violence begins in a relationship, it andpowerfulantidotestotheculturalandreligious getsworseandmorefrequentovertime.Battering norms in our society. By confronting the myths is not just one physical attack. It’s one person’s aboutdomesticviolence,wegainanunderstanding domination and control of the other. It is a num- oftheproblemandclarifyourpastoralresponses. ber of tactics (intimidation, threats, economic Tofurtherourunderstandingofdomesticvio- deprivation, and psychological and sexual abuse) lence, consider the following myths and facts usedrepeatedly. adapted from the SafeHouse Center Inc., in Ann Myth 5 Battered women always stay in violent Arbor,Michigan: relationships. Myth1 Domesticviolenceonlyoccursinminor- Fact Many battered women leave their abusers ity, poor, poorly educated, or “dysfunctional” permanently, and despite many obstacles, suc- families. ceedinbuildingalifefreeofviolence.Almostall Fact There are doctors, ministers, psycholo- battered women leave at least once. The perpe- gists, and professionals who beat or abuse their trator dramatically escalates his violence when a wives. Battering happens in rich, white, edu- woman leaves (or tries to) because it is neces- cated,andrespectablefamilies.Abouthalfofthe sary for him to reassert control and ownership. couples in the U.S. experience violence at some Battered women are often very active (and far timeintheirrelationship. from helpless) on their own behalf. Their efforts TowardanUnderstandingandFaithfulResponse 7 oftenfailbecausethebatterercontinuestoassault everywhere.Talesofabuseinfamiliesarecommon themandinstitutionsfailtoofferprotection. inourcommunities.MarieFortunewritesinSexual Myth 6 The community places responsibility Violence, forviolencewhereitbelongs—onthecriminal. Prevention of (interpersonal) violence re- Fact Most people blame the victim of battering quires addressing the root causes of the for the crime, sometimes without realizing it. problem. Sexual violence is a widespread They expect the woman to stop the violence and problem, taking place in a broad social repeatedlyanalyzehermotivationsfornotleaving contextwhichallowsandevenencourages rather than scrutinizing why the batterer keeps it to occur. Rape and child sexual abuse beatingherandwhythecommunityallowsit. arelife-threateningby-productsofaviolent, sexistandracistsociety. Myth 7 If a battered woman wanted to leave, shecouldjustcallthepolice. Oftenvictimsfirstturntotheirreligiouscom- munities for help. In her essay “Ministry in Fact Police have traditionally been reluctant to ResponsetoViolenceintheFamily:Pastoraland respond to domestic assaults or to intervene in Prophetic, ” Fortune states that the task of min- what they consider a private matter. People of istry is to provide the resources of faith and the color may be reluctant to call the police because congregationtoaccomplishthefollowinggoals: law enforcement officers often exemplify racist attitudesandbehaviors. (cid:1) Protectionofthevictim/victimsfromfurther abuse.Theimmediatesafetyoftheperson(s) Myth8 Ifabatteredwomanreallywantedtoleave, harmedmustbeserved. shecouldjustpackup,go,andgethelpsomewhere else. (cid:1) Stoppingtheabuser’sviolence.Thismeans immediatecessationoftheabusivebehavior Fact Battered women considering leaving their andcallingtheabusertoaccountinorderto assailants are faced with the very real possibility preventitscontinuation.Theministercan ofseverephysicalharmorevendeath.Assailants makeitclearthatthisbehaviorisintolerable, deliberately isolate their partners and deprive immoral,andcriminalinmoststates. them of jobs and opportunities for acquiring educationandskills.This,combinedwithunequal (cid:1) Restorationofrelationshipifpossibleormourn- opportunitiesforwomeningeneralandalackof ingthelossoftherelationship.Butrestoration affordablechildcare,makesitexcruciatinglydiffi- ofarelationshipisimpossiblepriortothe cultforwomentoleave.Somepriests,clergy,and authenticachievementofthetwomore rabbishavebeenextremelysupportiveofbattered urgentgoalsofprotectionandendingthe women.Othersignoreabuse,areunsupportive,or violence. activelysupporttheassailant’scontrolofhispower Religious professionals’ and lay leaders’ becauseofalackoftrainingandunderstanding. propheticresponsetointerpersonalviolenceand Myth 9 Men who batter are often good fathers abusebeginsbybreakingthesilenceandspeaking andshouldhavejointcustodyoftheirchildren. openly from the pulpit, in communities, and in Fact Atleast70percentofmenwhobattertheir congregationalnewsletters.Ministersandleaders wives,sexuallyorphysically,abusetheirchildren. should be prepared for disclosures from con- All children suffer from witnessing their father gregants of any age. They must empathize with assaulttheirmother. victims,validatetheirexperiences,andhelpthem solve their problems. This response requires Ministry in Response knowledgeoflocalresources. Thestoriesofinterpersonalviolenceagainstchil- Religious educators can do their greatest dren and women and in teen relationships are ministry to families by providing education that 8 CongregationandCulture supports healthy family relationships and pre- ventsabusiverelationships.TheOurWholeLives lifespan sexuality education series offers oppor- tunities at several significant points in the life cycle to provide healthy norms and expectations for right relationships. Children need prevention education. We need to teach them self-respect and self-confidence and give them permission and the skills to say “no” to any adult who may harm them. Teenagers who are exploring their sexuality and their relationships need accurate information in order to have expectations about mutuality, choice, and respect in a relationship. Adults who are approaching marriage and life- long commitment need to have opportunities to reflect carefully on their expectations of each other and their relationship. Adult children who arefacingtheillnessordisabilityofanadultpar- ent need information, resources, and congrega- tional support to deal with the stress of possible elderabuseorneglect. Whatdoesourfaithrequireofus?Isafaithful response to interpersonal violence and abuse possible in our congregations? Can UU clergy and lay leaders speak prophetically and respond pastorally to all forms of interpersonal violence? Ourfaithcallsustoworkforjusticethatprovides healing and promotes equality and compassion. Thefollowingessaysarticulatefaithfulresponses tothemanyformsofinterpersonalviolence.May we cast our lot with those workers who, in the words of Adrienne Rich, “age after age, per- versely,withnoextraordinarypower,reconstitute theworld.” TowardanUnderstandingandFaithfulResponse 9 A Systems View of Congregational Life Kenneth Gordon Hurto Inaseriesofletterswrittentohischildrenduring samenessandsimilarity.Bycontrast,theselfforce World War I, Hugh Lofting invents a creature refers to all those qualities and actions that calledPushMePullYou,afancifulanimalthatlooks make us distinctindividuals.Theselfforceprizes likeallamawithtwoheadstryingtogoopposite uniquenessanddiversity. directionsatonce.Itisanaptmetaphorforunder- These forces drive our actions as we seek to standingthispoint:Wepulltogethertocreatenew find a balance between them. Often, they are in life(literallyinreproduction,figurativelyinallour tension, within our own being and with those we sharedactivities).Wegiveofourselvesforagreater love.TheologianPaulTillichsaysmuchthesame good.Wealsofindoutwhowearebecauseweare when he notes, “What is most characteristically inrelationshiptoothers.Equally,weneedtofollow humanaboutusisthetensionbetweenthedesire our own star, separate from our relationships. to be ‘free’—self-identifying and self-choosing— Whenwedo,weareheldbackbyourwantingto andtobe‘related’—toloveandtobeloved.” belong.Itseemsbecomingadistinctiveselfthreat- Bowen’s Theory asks: How is a family— ensthe“us.”Evenmore,ifwefollowthatstar,we including the extended congregational family— becomeanxiousthatwemayendupallalone. trying to balance these forces? What is the inter- HowcanyoubeyouandIbemeandwebewe, play between connectedness and separateness? all at once? It’s a classic approach-avoidance How can a congregation promote closeness so dilemma.Itisanage-oldquestion.Itisthevery that no one dissolves? How do we help people nature of our existence. How we manage this live lives of integrity in which no one is violated? dilemmashapesallthatwedo. How does this family or group cope with the Dr. Murray Bowen, a Washington, D.C. re- inherent tensions in the dance of self and togeth- searcherwhostudiedfamiliesinthe1950s,intro- erness? duced a theory of the family based on empirical Thisessayprovidesthereaderwithanoverview observation.Intime,thetheoryevolvedtoinclude ofthisthinking.Ourgoalistoofferawayofthink- eight interlocking ideas premised on the notion ingabouttheissuesofcongregationallifeandthe thattherearetwoprimaryforcesthatshapeour wayindividualsandgroupsfunctionwithinthem. lives: The togetherness force and the self force. Totheextentthatwecantakeabird’seyeviewof Thetogethernessforceincludesallthethingswedo theemotionalprocessofrelationshipswithinthe toestablishandmaintainrelationshipswitheach congregation,wecanbelessreactivewhenthings other.Thetogethernessforcepullsusclose,favoring go wrong and think more clearly about how to 10 CongregationandCulture right them. Put differently, we’ll be able to lead that we play out every day. Because nature loves moreeffectively.We’llframerightrelationsinthe the quixotic, we are free to move beyond those contextoftheorymorethaninaprescribedsetof rolesbutnoteasilyorfar.Thefamilyscriptcanbe rulesandbehaviors. a blessing or a curse, but it is real. We deviate When people come together and form rela- from our roles at our peril, risking ostracism or tionships, is something truly new is born. We pressure to conform. The togetherness force weaveourlivestogethertocreatealivingprocess. keepsusinlineandthesysteminbalance. Our word choices reveal this is something new. Inadiverseandcomplexworld,thisdynamic At some discernible moment of closeness, the can be truly confusing because we are also pronouns we and us appear. Indeed, the word embeddedinourfieldsofexpectations.Whenwe family is premised on the notion that it is some- encounter someone whose family constellation thing far greater than the mere sum of its parts. callsforactionsmarkedlydifferentfromours,we Afamilymaybecomprisedofpersons,butithas wonder how they can possibly think and act as its own group reality. Extrapolating from this they do. We think they are strange and perhaps notion,“we”canbeateamtowhichonebelongs, weputthemdownforbeingdifferent.Incongre- one’s class or race, even one’s nation, as in “we gational life, where many family constellations Americans.” Each shared togetherness is as real overlap, the ways different people are “sup- aseachindividualself. posed” to act not only diverge they can come Once the “us” comes into being, something into outright conflict and set the stage for even interesting follows: Part of my sense of who “I” more tension, reactivity, and hard feelings in amdependsonthat“we.”Igainasenseofiden- sharedcongregationallife. tity. I belong to my family, my congregation, my Unlesswecanstepbackandviewthesystem country, and so on. I even have T-shirts to prove cosmically, such variability is baffling. It’s not a it. With time and a growing sense of belonging I malevolent or even conscious choice that drives cannot even conceive of myself outside of the such arrangements. It is just that relationship group identity. I will alter or sacrifice my desires systems tend to stay in their orbits, prizing the and ambitions to further this sense of together- harmony of today’s togetherness more than the ness. Loyalty and team-playing are highly valued challengeandpromiseofnewwaysofbeing. in our society. We prize mutuality and work hard Whenever people come into relationship, an toobtainandnurtureit.Oneforall;allforone!is emotional dynamic takes place among and not just a romantic slogan; it is the very essence betweenthem.Intuitivelywecallthatgoodorbad of our humanity. When we have it, life is good; “vibes.” It can also be called the emotional field. whenwedon’t,lifeishell. The emotional field may be compared to an elec- Aslongasthethingsthegroupdoestogether trical or gravitational field, the dominant feature satisfy my sense of myself, there is no problem. ofwhichisthatintimeitbecomesindependentof However, the pull of being a separate self con- and more significant than the actions of its con- flicts with the desire to belong. What I want is stituent parts. For instance, gravity holds planets oftennotexactlythesameaswhatsomeoneelse in their orbits around the sun. Once a planet has wants, nor even what the group declares is enteredthesystemandfounditsplace,theplanet important.“Getoffmyback!”weshout,inresist- cannotadoptadifferingorbitofitsownaccord— ance to being absorbed. “Don’t tread on me” thegravitationalfieldkeepsitinplace. remains a symbol of American independence. Similarly, in family and other intimate net- “Just leave me alone,” whines the unhappy works, once people have found their place in the teenager.Toomuchtogethernessisnofun. familybalance,theycannotsimplywillthemselves Infamilylife,ourpositioninthefamilydeter- or others to function differently. While system mines who we are. Each of us is assigned a role change can be initiated by individual members, ASystemsViewofCongregationalLife 11 natural resistance will keep everyone in their actions can lead to profound change throughout proper orbit. However, if a leader can function thesystem.Evidencedoessupportthisnotion.For steadily in a new way, the other members of the instance, when parents work on strengthening systemwilladaptintimetoanewemotionalfield. theirrelationshipwitheachother,theirchildrendo Real change is about the whole system, not betterineveryway.Likewise,incongregations,act- necessarilyanyconstituentpart.Intheend,ifthe ingupandoutisoftentheanxiousresultofweak emotional field does not change, the system will and unclear leadership. If a minister delivers a returnto itsoriginalstatusquoortheemotional strong “Here I Stand” sermon or if the board has balancebeforetheonsetofachange. excitingpriorities,peoplemightagreetoweartheir A question for anyone studying a congrega- nametagsandrumormongeringmightstop. tion’s emotional field is: What scripts are being This notion of multidimensional causality also played out here? How has this congregation suggeststhataperiodofimbalanceorupsetisnec- been“formatted”toallowcertainthingsandpro- essary to change a relationship system. There is a scribe others? Who can do what? How are roles silver lining when things go “wrong.” Possibilities predetermined? And what happens to someone arisethatweresimplynotconsideredbefore. whodoesnotfitintoorwhoviolatesthatfieldof Family events like births, confirmations or expectation? bar/bah mitzvahs, marriages, divorce, disease, changes in work or residence, or the death of a Dealing with Change family member change the emotional field. The Mostofthetime,whenwetrytoexplainwhysome- membershavetofindanewbalance.Thejockey- thinghappens,werelyonasimplenotionthatone ingbackandforth,say,toincludeanewsister-in- event causes a subsequent event, but causality is lawatthefamilyThanksgivingdinnerisanexam- rarelysosimple.Abetterwaytothinkofitisthatall ple of what goes on all the time as families cope parts of a relational system cause each other and withchangesintheirrelationships. in turn are reciprocally caused by each other. The Incongregationallifetimesoftransitionalso pointisthatifwearetograspthedynamicsoffam- stir things up and lead to both conflict and cre- ily and congregational life, we need to resist sim- ative thinking. An episode of unprofessional plisticexplanations.Thereisgoodnews,however: conduct or an upsurge in membership throws Whenaproblemoccurs(moreneutrallystatedasa everyone off balance. The natural reaction is to change in the status quo), we don’t have to know try to restore the old balance. However, if lead- theprecisecause.Lefttoitsowndevices,thesys- ers stay calm, this moment of confusion can temwillrestoreitsbalancebeforelong.Thisiswhy lead to better functioning all around. There’s timehealsmanywounds. nothing like a good squabble or a sudden, large The theory also suggests that in order to bequest to force a group to attend both to how changeanemotionalfield,wecanexertpressure itgetsalongandwhatitvalues.Instinctively,we anywhere. In families and in congregations, we understand this by the way we create deliberate tend to focus our attention on something that is unsettlingintheintentionalelectionofnewoffi- out of sorts. We tend to the “problem child” of cerseveryyear. thefamilyororganization,whichhasthecurious But there is no guarantee that a system will effect of organizing the whole system around evolveaftertheemotionalfieldhasbeenupset;a thatchildormalfunctioningpart. system can just as easily devolve to a lower level Thinking relationally, we might be as well off offunctioning.Intimesofgreatanxiety,families, turning our attention elsewhere. Does the choir congregations, and even nations frequently tear sing off-key? Strengthen the religious education themselves apart before a new equilibrium is program. Your child doesn’t turn in her home- reached. This phenomenon, in which more peo- work? Take up a new hobby. Seemingly unrelated ple act out in increasingly immature ways, is 12 CongregationandCulture calledsocietalregression. inherently bad people but because responsible Early twentieth-century mathematician Alfred leaders have failed. For things to truly get better, NorthWhiteheadarguesthatrealityconsistsnot the whole system has to reorganize and under- of things per se but the way they interact. This standitsowndynamics. understanding is very much along the lines of Bowen’s theory. Our relationships, the many Emotional Triangles forms of “us” that we create over time are the Any relationship with another creates tension substanceofourreality.Individualsmatter,tobe betweentheselfandtogethernessforces.Theeas- sure. But individuals find their selves in relation- iestandmostnaturalwaytoeasethattensionisto ships.Thewaytherelationaldynamicenduresor talktoathirdparty.Whenwetalkaboutratherthan changes and a person’s place in the relationship to someone else, we create an emotional triangle. determineshowapersonfunctions. Triangles stabilize the emotional field. Bowen’s This suggests two mistakes to watch out for: theorysaysyoucannotunderstandhumanbehav- focusing on a person or persons as the singular ior until you think in threes. The triangle is the cause of events and becoming distracted by the basicmoleculeofanyrelationalsystem. substanceorcontentofaneventratherthanthe Typicalexamplesoftrianglesinclude: underlying emotional process of the relation- • tattling,aswhenonechildcomplainstoa ship. Far too often when families have difficul- parentabouthersister’sunwillingnesstoshare ties, they devote their attention to the person • watercoolerbelly-achingabout“management” exhibiting symptoms (bad grades, a partner’s affair, inappropriate words or touch, rebellion, • boardroomlamentationaboutlazyworkers irresponsible actions) rather than looking at the • e-mailexchangesbetweencommitteemem- system of relationships and how the many par- bersaboutothermembers ties involved submit to or even promote the • gossipyneighborsdisapprovingofsomeone symptomatic behavior. To illustrate: A congre- else’snewcar gant lights up a cigarette during worship. No • churchmemberscriticizingthereligiousedu- one, including the ushers, says a word. After cationdirector’swayoftellingstoriestokids services, members complain to the minister or speak ill of the offender. It’s rare for a parish- Triangles can also be about ideas or events, ioner to ask: Why did we silently tolerate this? anything that makes us anxious—the new car- This simple example calls for a response such pet in your sister’s house, the government’s as:“Sir,smokingisnotallowed.” inability to balance the budget, or a congrega- Other inappropriate behaviors are not so tion’secologyprogram. cleanly resolved, such as the church’s “party- There’s nothing evil or immoral about trian- man” hugging women at church parties; the gles;infactthey’reinescapable.Whetheryoulike parishioner who feels she just has to have a say, it or not, you will both triangle and be triangled; and a negative one at that, every time there is a it’sawayofcoping.Muchofthetime,whileatri- congregational meeting; or the member who angle may not resolve a problem, it can serve to comes to church unwashed and odorous; or the provideareleaseofemotionalpressure—thereby lonelybachelorwhoinsiststhattheministertake actuallyallowingoneofthepartnerstoapproach hisphonecallsatdinnertime. theproblemwithlessintensityandmorecreativ- Systems theory, noting a tendency toward ity. This is why we hire consultants: We triangle equilibrium, informs us that hurtful behavior themintohelpusthinkmoreclearly. continues because the system tolerates it. However,manytrianglesareperniciousinsofar Troublemakers need to be called to account. If astheyarewaysofnotdealinghonestlywithone they go unchecked, it is not because they are another. Wary ministers or church leaders will ASystemsViewofCongregationalLife 13 hear alarm bells anytime they hear parishioners hostilityfromherfriends,whonowblameherfor talking intensely about each other lest they find their troubles. This phenomenon is well known themselves caught up in the drama of an unat- to every police officer called to a domestic dis- tendedconflict. pute;themomentshetriestointervene,thetwo Themoreintensearelationshipis,thegreater warringpartiesturnalltheirangryenergyonher, ourneedtobringothersintothesituation.Arule puttingthehelpfulofficerindanger. of thumb suggests that healthy families should The first rule of triangles is that anytime you have many triangles so the anxiety in the emo- try to fix another’s problems you end up with tional field does not get stuck in any one person stress. You know it’s happened when in a or idea. Living with others is often irritating as moment of injured puzzlement, you say, “I was wellasablessing.Themorewayswehavetodis- only trying to help.” Anyone in a leadership posi- sipate our anxiety, the less stress there is on any tion is especially vulnerable to this trap. particular pairing. Put another way, the more Recognizing when you are in a triangle and get- friendswehave,thelesslikelyitisthatanyoneof ting unhooked is an important part of congrega- them will become excessively important to our tionalleadership. well-being. The family unit tends to be more intense than other relationships; therefore it is Emotional Leadership more vulnerable to both healthy and unhealthy Every family, every congregation, and every triangulation. groupneedssomeonetobeincharge.Theories It’s not easy to tell the difference. One per- abound as to what constitutes effective leader- son’sblowingsmokeisanotherperson’svicious ship.Typicallyleadershipisdescribedasasetof gossip. Sometimes when we’re triangled into a character traits like vision, assertiveness, and situation, we find ourselves connected but man- focus on goals. Bowen Family Systems Theory, agenottotakeupthestress.Othertimesweget particularly as developed by Rabbi Dr. Edwin H. pulledindespiteourbestintentions. Friedman, takes a very different approach. Oneofthemostinjuriousaspectsoftriangles Friedman argues that leadership is an emo- isthattheonetalkedabouthasnosay(andoften tionalprocess,notatacticalone.Itisnotabout no knowledge) about what is being said about a particular set of techniques or tricks. It is not them. Often we’re told that what we’re about to about understanding. It is not about power, per hearis“justbetweenyouandme”—andourper- se. It is not about making others different or ception of the party talked about is forever persuadingorwillfullydirectingthemtodoany- changed.Oncesomeonesays,“Didyouknowthe thing. It is about self-regulation within the rela- head of the preschool has a drinking problem?” tionship. Leadership is primarily about the you’ll wonder the next time you see that teacher, managementofself,beingsomebodyandbeing whether it’s true or not. This is why most family present.Leadershiprequiresbeingawareofand therapists and organizational consultants urge modulating how you function in the relation- direct communication. To the extent that triangu- ships that mean something to you. It is about lation perpetuates secrets or promulgates false- differentiation. hood,itcanbeaverydestructiveforce.Hencethe Using an analogy from biology, every body assertion“You’reonlyashealthyasyoursecrets!” has to have a head. The head’s function is to be The secret is to be aware and managing your clear about where it is going. The head defines sense of self in the triangle. Remember that the the goal, the values, and the direction of the purpose of the triangle is to delegate anxiety out organism. A good head pays attention to what ofthedyadicrelationship.Ifapersonisnotcare- other parts of the body are saying—you cannot ful and tries to step into the problem, she may ignore a broken foot—but stays the course in find herself on the receiving end of considerable termsofwhatitvaluesandaspiresto.Thesame 14 CongregationandCulture