of possible abuse and claims of negligence. This years. Other congregations mandate national practicealsoprotectstheadultvolunteersagainst searchesforallpaidstaff,regardlessoftheirtime falseallegationsmadebyachildoryouth. living in the state. Your state may have its own Application forms, personal reference forms, background check requirements for organiza- andbackgroundcheckshelptoweedoutundesir- tions that recruit people to work with children able applicants. Congregations may wince at this and youth. Make sure your congregation is in idea because recruiting volunteers is a monu- compliance. Check with a local attorney, your mentaltaskalreadyandaskingformoreinforma- church’s insurance agent, and local law enforce- tion may discourage potential volunteers. But mentofficialstohelpyouunderstandwhatinfor- congregations that go to these extra lengths do mationyouneedtoprocure. not encounter massive resistance; rather they Even with all the compelling evidence for why findthatpotentialvolunteersarethankfulthatthe your congregation should institute background congregation is taking its role seriously and are checks, leadership may decide that they are not happy to provide the information. When your readytotakethatstep.Oneprecautionyoumight congregation institutes these screening proce- consideristheuseofvoluntarydisclosureforms, dures,itisessentialtostateclearlyhowtheinfor- whichalsoactasaprotectionforthechurchand mation is to be filed, who has access to the files itsmembers.Theseformsdonotprotectagainst and information, and how and with whom it will liability or negligence claims like background be shared. These policies should be shared with screening, but voluntary disclosure forms offer a all prospective volunteers. See the UUA web site degree of assurance that a potential volunteer at www.uua.org/cde/responsiblestaffing for sample doesnothaveredflagsinhisorherbackground. policies; an application for paid or volunteer em- The American Camping Association, a national ployment; a screening authorization form, inclu- organization committed to excellence and safety ding disclosures and disclaimers; authorization in camp experiences, offers these forms through andreleaseforms,andareferencecheckform. theironlinebookstoreatwww.acacamps.org. Criminal background checks may be a con- Onceyouhavetheappropriatescreeningsys- tentious issue for some members of the congre- tem in place, you still need to make sure you gation who are concerned about civil liberties have written procedures for how to handle issues. It is important to remind people that a reporting abuse, whether the abuse happens criminal record check and perhaps a driving within or outside the congregation. It is not a record check is necessary if the volunteer will be question of if, but when you will need this infor- driving minors during church events. Remind mation. Paid and volunteer staff need to be pre- themthatthechecksareforthesafetyofthechil- pared and trained to deal with a disclosure dren. Many insurance companies contend that immediately and effectively and in a way that background checks are an expected part of any putstheleaststrainpossibleonboththeperson riskmanagementplanandshouldnotbeignored. making the disclosure and the person receiving Some people cite cost as another reason for it.Responsibleandcarefulattentiontothesitua- not using background checks. There is a wide tion is an extremely important ministry in the range of fees for screening services—ranging congregation. from$3.50toover$150.00forthemostcompre- Responding to a Disclosure of Abuse hensive. Searches limited to one state are less expensive than national searches. Many services When you become aware of an abusive situation, allow you to determine the depth and breadth of reviewyourstate’srequirementsonreportingsus- thesearch.Somepeoplesuggestlimitingaback- pectedorknownincidentsofabusetolocalpolice ground check to the state level if a potential vol- or child protective services and create a plan for unteer has lived in the state for ten or more complying with the legal reporting requirements UpholdingTrustintheReligiousEducationCommunity 45 and making statements to the media, congrega- Health and Human Services keeps this informa- tion,orotherofficials.Thereportingpolicyshould tionuptodate.Onceyouknowwhothemandated provide clear instructions for congregation work- reportersare,itisvitaltoclearlycommunicatethis ersonhowtorecognizeindicatorsofabuseorvio- informationateveryvolunteerandstafftraining. lations of established safety guidelines. Congre- In addition, you need to create a comprehen- gationworkersmustknowwhotogotowithinthe sive plan for how the reports are filed and by organizationwhenmakingareport,sothatappro- whom. Again, each state differs on how the priatefollow-uptakesplace. reporting must be done. It is the role of church Deciding these things in advance of a poten- leadership to ensure the proper procedures are tiallyharmfulsituationiscrucial.Takeforexample madereadilyavailabletothevolunteersandstaff. the following situation: The religious educator As your congregation begins working on receives a report from a congregant that he saw thesepolicies,somemayask,“Whatdowemean themotherofayoungchildinthepreschoolroom bychildabuse?”TheChildAbusePreventionand handleherchildroughlyandwithwhatseemedto Treatment Act (CAPTA) provides federal guide- him extreme frustration and anger. The young lines that states must incorporate into their mother was serving as one of the youth advisors statutorydefinitionsofchildabuseandneglect.As andtheobserverhadasonintheyouthgroupand applied to reporting statutes, these definitions was also a caseworker for the state’s child protec- describe the acts and conditions that determine tion services. The congregant was shocked at the the grounds for state intervention in the protec- intensityofbehaviorandgrewfearfulforthechild’s tion of a child’s well-being. Many states provide well-beingandresolvedtoreporttheincident.The separate definitions for physical abuse, neglect, congregantwhoobservedthesituationinformsthe sexual abuse, and emotional maltreatment. Your religious educator that she has reported the inci- staffandvolunteersmustbeawareofcurrentstate denttothecountyDepartmentofSocialServices. definitions. A local attorney or your insurance co- After consulting with the senior minister, the mpanyisagoodresourceforcurrentdefinitions. religious educator calls the mother to let her It is imperative to create a comprehensive know that she is aware of the report. She also plan for screening workers, supervising workers, callsthecountycaseworkerandidentifiesherself and reporting suspected abuse that is easy to as the leader of the congregation where the inci- understand. Our response and involvement in dentwasobservedandsaysthatsheisincontact these situations must be intentional. Part of the with the family. The religious educator also responsibility of a paid staff is to ensure that makes contact with the children’s father in an every volunteer with children and youth is ade- effort to keep that relationship open. Eventually quatelyeducatedandtrainedintheexpectedpro- themotherpullsherselfoutofthechurchbutthe cedures. This should happen annually because fatherandchildrenremainedinvolved.Thereare the state definitions or expectations may change some procedures and policies that were put in and you need to ensure that every volunteer and placepriortotheincident,buttheyarenotcom- paid staff person fully understands his or her prehensive.Alongthewaythereligiouseducator responsibilities in suspected abuse situations. It writes up incident reports, keeps files of what behoovescongregationstoalsoeducatethepar- transpires, and maintains close communication ents of children and youth and any other inter- withtheseniorminister. ested congregants. All church workers must be Every volunteer or staff person in your church fully informed about their responsibilities in needs to know who is considered a mandated order to avoid legal action or criminal penalties reporterintheinstanceofsuspectedabuse.Every forfailingtosubmitreportsproperly. statehasslightlydifferentvariationsandyouneed In many congregations the Our Whole Lives toverifytherequirements.TheU.S.Departmentof programistaughttooneormanyagelevels.These 46 ReligiousEducationandSafety comprehensive sexuality education curricula for information from the victim. The reactions can childrenandyouthaddressissuesofsexualabuse. range from disbelief, horror, sadness, anger, and Thisproactivepreventioneducationgiveschildren a loss of faith when they realize that even and youth information about how to recognize, Unitarian Universalists sometimes treat each avoid,andreportabuse.OurWholeLivesteachers, other without respecting the inherent worth and youth advisors, and professional religious leaders dignityofeachindividual. need to be aware of the potential for disclosures As your congregation goes through the from children and youth during Our Whole Lives processofcreatingsafetypolicies,itisimportant classesoryouthgroupactivities.Reportingproce- to think about how it will respond to all those dures within the congregation, and if necessary affected by abuse. While it is crucial that all outside the congregation, need to be understood appropriatereportingtostateorcountyagencies andfollowedbyallreligiouseducationworkers. is carried out, it is also important to ensure that InthePacificSouthwestDistrict,alargepartof the spiritual and emotional needs of all involved programming involves six camps for young peo- aretakencareofinaloving,respectful,andheal- ple in grades two through twelve. A growing part ing way. One way to do this is to develop a team ofthedistrict’scommitmenttoexcellenceinthese that is responsible for ministering to people programs has been to create safety requirements affected by the disclosure of abuse. This team, that mandate screening and reporting proce- ideally including a counselor or therapist, works dures. Inevitably a young person will disclose an closelywiththereligiouseducatorandtheminis- incident of domestic abuse during the camping tertofacilitateagroupsession,allowingeveryone season.Thisdisclosureisalmostalwaysgiventoa to share their feelings constructively. These peo- youth or young adult cabin counselor. Campers pleneedtoknowtheyaresupportedinacompas- become close to the counselors and feel safe in sionatewaybythecongregation’sleadership. confidingthistypeofinformationtothem.Having In some circumstances, charged or convicted aprotocolinplaceformakingreportshasbeena child sex offenders are active members of congre- blessing because it enables the camp program to gations and may pose a risk to children or youth. continue uninterrupted while the designated sen- These are challenging situations to deal with, ior staff person makes the necessary reports. The requiring a great deal of thoughtful consideration chaplainandthecabincounselorareabletowork onthepartofprofessionalandlayleaders.Insome with the victim, reassuring them that they will be cases, if a known child sex offender enters or okayandlettingthemknowwhattoexpectnext. choosestoremainapartofthecongregation,clear What if an incident of abuse occurs in your boundariesareestablishedforthatpersontotake congregation, facility, or site? First, treat all alle- partincongregationlifewhilemaintainingthepro- gations seriously, with care and respect for the tection of children and youth. These boundaries, privacy and rights of the individuals involved. terms,andrestrictionsareoutlinedinwritingand Implement your response plan, which should oftenreferredtoaslimitedaccessagreements.”(See include contact with the congregation’s insur- sample agreements on the UUA web site at ance carrier, consultation with your attorney, full www.uua.org/cde/ethics/resources.)The congrega- cooperation with civil authorities, documenta- tion’s professional and/or lay leaders should tionandpreparedpositionstatementaboutyour review these documents with the offender and congregation’s awareness of the problems of carefully implement and enforce them if the child abuse, your concern for victims, and the offenderagreestoabidebythem. risk reduction and safety measures your congre- Asyourcongregationdelvesmoreintohowto gationhasinplacetoprotectchildren. sustainfamiliesandothersinyourfaithcommu- Time and experience have taught us the nity in instances of abuse, you can consider im- importance of ministering to those who receive plementing educational ministries on the topic, UpholdingTrustintheReligiousEducationCommunity 47 suchashowtocomfortfamiliesaffectedbyabuse, Love is a central tenant of our faith. In our wayschildrenandyouthcanprotectthemselves, quest to make our religious homes safe and and the wide array of community resources for healthy, we must remember this is ministry. As victims and survivors. Programs such as these congregational leaders we must remember our canbecarriedoutthroughadultreligiouseduca- responsibility to minister to the needs of those tionprograms,specialforums,districtorcluster present in our faith communities, those vulnera- workshops,orothervenues. ble to injury or abuse, those who are injured or The minister and religious educator will most abused and their family members, those who likely be directly involved with working with respondtoorreportsuspectedabuse,thoseserv- the family of the victim. In many instances, the ing as volunteers with children and youth, and congregation’spolicyistoinformthefamilywhen yes,eventhosewhomayabuseorcauseharmto a report of abuse has been given to the authori- others.Ourfaithcallsustoloveandcareforone ties. This opens the door of honest and direct anotherincreatingsafecongregations. communication, allowing the religious educator to be in contact with the family so he or she can offer assistance and guidance in finding help or otherresources. Equipping and training program staff, volun- teers, and participants with information and resources on creating safe congregations, risk management, and abuse prevention is essential. Ongoing efforts to inform, train, and model safe practices and ethical behavior may include giving paid and volunteer religious education staff, par- ents, and congregational leaders the following informationordocuments: • basicinformationonsafety,riskmanagement, andabusepotential • procedurestodocumentandreportincidents orsuspicionofabusebyvolunteersandpaid staff • issuesandlimitsofconfidentialitywhendeal- ingwithminors • suggestions for professional staff strategies andproceduresforhandlingincidentsorsus- picionofabuse • disclosures of reported abuse, including the process for how families of victims are han- dledandministeredto • process for handling and ministering to the accused, including drafting limited access agreementsforthosewhooffendorposearisk toothersinthecontextofthecongregation 48 ReligiousEducationandSafety A Sex Offender in Church Patricia Timmino In1996aparishionerinvitedaknownsexoffender have this relationship directly to growth that he to First Unitarian Universalist Society in Middle- had experienced as a result of being accepted by boro, Massachusetts, because he felt the man peopleatthechurch. (let’scallhimDan)wastryinghardtomakeafresh The new minister invited Dan to do a startandcouldusethesupportofachurchfamily. “moment of fellowship” at the church. It was a TheministerwasinformedandmetwithDanand proud day for both Dan and the church when he welcomed him. Dan agreed to have a “buddy,” returned,steppedintothepulpit,andthankedthe who could be with him while he was in church. congregation for accepting him, helping him to Thepurposeofthebuddywasbothtoassurethe grow,andmakinganewlifepossible.Hereceived safety of parishioners and to protect Dan against awarmovation. accusationsaswell. Twoyearslater,achurchmembercametothe Afewmonthslater,newsofDan’sbackground ministerbecauseheheardthatanewcomerwasa leaked out. Many people were angry. Some par- convicted sex offender. The minister made an ents with young children were particularly angry appointment with the man. From the outset, the because they had unknowingly invited this man ministerfeltthatRonwasverydifferentfromDan. into their home. The minister supported Dan’s The minister regretted that no policy had been righttobeinthechurch. developed the first time around. Ron agreed to For his part, Dan didn’t hide his past. Most haveabuddy,andtoallowtheministertoinform peopleweregenuinelymovedbyhowhardhewas the leadership, including the religious education working to heal himself through therapy and director, of his presence. He also agreed to the twelve-step programs. Some kept their children minister’s exploratory request to inform the con- away from him as a precaution, but challenges gregation in due time, once an appropriate, low- overhisrighttoattendchurchsubsidedovertime. keywaytodoitcouldbedevised. Eventually Dan entered into a loving relation- TheministerthenaskedtheParishCommittee ship with a woman and left First UU to attend todevelopaplanforthechurchtocreateapolicy church some fifteen miles away. First UU had regarding the participation of sex offenders in changedministersbythistime.Thenewminister churchlife. knew Dan and would sometimes bump into him Shortly thereafter, Ron disappeared from in the supermarket. Dan credited his ability to church. It turned out that Ron had been arrested ASexOffenderinChurch 49 and charged (and would subsequently be con- With this in mind, we teach our children two victed) of a new sex-related offense. The first safety classes a year and offer one to adults. The offense had been with a woman; this time it was safety policy is published for all to see. The withayoungman. processisongoing. Emotions flew when the congregation learned that another sex offender had been among them. The minister immediately invited everyone with a strongviewtoformaSafetyCommitteetodevelop a policy. Out of the 110 members, 17 people in a church of 110 agreed to serve. Some, mostly par- ents, argued that because our children assume that any adult they see at church is safe, there should be zero tolerance of sex offenders. Social justice advocates argued that UUs should minis- ter to this population because no one else will; if they’veservedtheirtime,weshouldnotcontinue topunishthemthroughostracism. Thecommitteememberseducatedthemselves, listened to experts, and argued to the point of exhaustion. They produced an interim policy that was accepted by the congregation at the annual meeting. This policy was crude and contained harsh language, and yet it represented the best workthecommitteewascapableofatthattime.It put something in place while the committee con- tinueditswork. Experience had taught that every situation wouldbeunique,sothecommitteesoughttocre- ate a policy that could deal with offenders as dif- ferentasDanandRon.Thefinalguidelinescalled for a trained standing Safety Committee to make decisions on a case-by-case basis. It offered a process for reporting concerns and a flexible checklist that would allow anything from total accesstoverylimitedparticipation. Thechurchisnowconsiderablymoresophisti- catedaboutsafetyandsexualethicsbecausethey have struggled with it so openly. In the end, the value of the safety policy is not nearly as great as the educational process to which the committee and church is dedicated. We now accept that no churchcaneverbeatotallysafeplacebecauseitis partofsocietyatlarge.Ourtruemeasureofsafety stemsnotfromapolicybutfromourlevelofedu- cationontheissueandourcontinuedwillingness totalkopenly. 50 ReligiousEducationandSafety Balancing Compassion and Protection Debra W. Haffner There have always been people who are sexually www.uua.org/cde/ethics/balancing/introduction attracted to children in congregations. In every.html. This essay is excerpted from that. The congregation, there are abusers, victims, sur- Unitarian Universalist Association is the first vivors,andbystandersofchildhoodsexualabuse. denomination in the United States to publish a The recent crisis in the U.S. Catholic Church dra- resourceonthisdifficultissue. matically illustrates that people we love and As a result of a 1996 federal law, every state admire may turn out to be sex offenders, causing now has a notification law for sex offenders who irreparable damage to people’s lives. Unitarian haveservedprisontimeandarebackinthecom- Universalists are not immune. We also know that munity. The federal law required states to pass most sexual abuse occurs among family mem- laws mandating that convicted sex offenders reg- bers,andwemaynotbeawareoftheabusethatis ister with local law enforcement after release and currentlyoccurringamongfamiliesinourcongre- to make these registries available to the general gations.Manyofourchildrenandyouthwhohave public.Overtime,eachstatehasadoptedstatutes participated in the Our Whole Lives program are modeledafterthefederallegislation,referredtoas speaking up as a result of receiving education Megan’sLawinmemoryofMeganKanka,aseven- aboutchildsexualabuse. year-old girl raped and murdered by a neighbor The Unitarian Universalist Association com- who, unknown to her family, was a convicted sex missioned me to develop a manual for how to offender. In 2000, the Supreme Court found the welcome a person with a history of sex offenses lawsconstitutional. into our congregations while assuring that our Peoplewhoarerequiredtoregisterhavecom- children, youth, and vulnerable adults are safe mitted a wide range of offenses from child mole- from abuse and exploitation. I interviewed more station, to rape, to exhibitionism and voyeurism. than a dozen congregations that had struggled Evenanineteen-year-oldwhohashadsexualinter- with this issue, consulted with experts in sexual coursewithafifteen-year-oldboyfriendorgirlfriend child abuse and sex offender treatment, did an and been turned in by irate parents is subject to extensive review of the public health literature, this law. It is estimated that as many as half a and convened an expert advisory board for the million people may be listed on these registries; publication. The complete handbook was pub- theStateofCaliforniaalonehasmorethan75,000 lished as an online publication, “Balancing Acts: people listed. To find out how to obtain the local Keeping Children Safe from Congregations” at registry, contact your local police department or BalancingCompassionandProtection 51 sheriff’s office. The KlaasKids Foundation has an exploitationforallofourmembers—children, updatedlistofstatelawsbasedonMegan’sLawat adults,visitors,andstaff. www.klaaskids.org (click on the button for “legisla- • We have a responsibility to treat every person tion”tobedirectedtoyourstate’slawandregistry). with worth and dignity and to provide a con- Despite the shockingly high number of regis- gregational home to all who seek one, while teredsexoffenders,thevastmajority(88percent) honoringthatinthecaseofanindividualwith of sex offenses continue to go unreported. The ahistoryofsexoffenses,theremustbelimita- vast majority of people who commit sex offenses tions to congregational involvement. That do not serve time in prison or receive mandated commitment means that only in rare cases treatment.Evenwithregistries,thereisnowaywe willapersonbedeniedaccesstoministryand canknowforsurewhomayabusechildren. fellowship.Inthewordsofonecongregation’s Yet we have an obligation and a commitment policy, we must provide “compassion, sup- tokeepourchildrensafe—fromthepersonwhois port, affirmation, and protection against fur- knowntohaveahistoryofmolestingchildrenand therharm.” from the person whose sexual attraction to chil- • We have a responsibility to educate ourselves drenisunknowntoanyonebutthemselves. about child sexual abuse and healthy child- As Unitarian Universalists we believe in the hoodsexualityaswellasbackgroundonsexual dignityandworthofeveryperson,andthatincludes offenders and to develop a process that will the person who has abused children, no matter helpusmakegooddecisionsabouttheactions how morally repugnant that person’s past behav- that we are called to take. We must be willing ior is. We believe in justice, equity, and compas- to listen, to use a democratic process, and to sion in human relations, qualities that we must be humble about our own certitudes in creat- bring to thinking about this difficult issue. We ingthesepolicies. affirm the use of the democratic process in our congregations, which means we must honor that Wehopethatbyraisingtheissuesaroundsex- thisishardworkthatwemustdotogetherincom- ual abuse and sex offenders, congregations can munity.Wesaywearechallengedto“confrontthe institutepoliciesbeforethereisacrisis.SomeUU powers and structures of evil with justice, com- congregations may want to think, “These issues passion,andthetransformingpoweroflove”and don’t affect us. After all, no one in our congrega- we must “heed the guidance of reason and the tionwoulddotheseterriblethings.”Unfortunately results of science.” The Restorative Justice for All even the “nicest people” may do these things. Report(www.uua.org/cde/ethics)statesitthisway: Oneestimateisthatbetween7and10percentof “We place a high value on creating a culture of the population may have a sexual attraction that sanctuary within our congregations. Anyone involves children. And although many of these should be able to enter our houses of worship people will never act on their feelings, some will. withoutfearofbeingexploitedinanyway.” With the advent of sex offender registries, we will Threetenetsunderlieoureffortstobalancethe often know when a convicted sex offender enters protectionofchildrenwithourPrinciples: ourcommunity. • We have a responsibility to assure that chil- If the congregation does not address these dren will be safe in our congregations from issuesbeforetheyoccur,thereislikelytobepanic sexual abuse, sexual assault, and harassment and a sense of crisis when a sex offender starts even or perhaps especially when we do not attendingactivitiesatthecongregation;someone know if there is an offender in our congrega- in the congregation is accused of abuse; or the tion. Indeed, we have a responsibility to see minister, religious educator, or a member finds that our congregations are sexually healthy outthatacongreganthasahistoryofabusingchil- and free of sexual harassment, abuse, and dren or youth. If you are in the midst of one of 52 ReligiousEducationandSafety thesesituationsanddonothavepoliciesinplace, to children? Do all volunteers in the religious you may want to first go to the “During a Crisis” education program receive annual training on section of the online manual “Balancing Acts” at whattodoiftheysuspectchildabuseorchild www.uua.org/cde/ethics/balancing. sexualabuse? The full manual provides background infor- • have a screening form for all employees, mation on child sexual abuse, sexual abuse pre- regardless of position, and all volunteers who vention, and pedophiles and others who abuse work with children and youth, asking them children. directly about possible histories of sexual There are three important facts to keep in offenses? mind that counter prevalent myths about child • haveeachstaffpersonandeachvolunteerwho sexual abuse. First, it’s a myth that the greatest works with children and youth sign a code of threats to children are known sex offenders or ethicsannually? strangers.Thefactisthatin90percentofcasesof • have a draft of a limited access agreement child sexual abuse, the abuser is an adult whom or checklist for convicted or accused sex the child knows and trusts. No policy for dealing offenders? with a convicted sex offender will assure that the • teach Our Whole Lives sexuality education in childreninyourcongregationaresafeunlessthere the religious education program, including arealsosafecongregationpoliciesinplace. sessions about child sexual abuse prevention It’salsoamyththatnearlyallsexoffenderswill at least twice at the elementary school age re-offend. The research tells us that many sex level,onceatthemiddleschoolagelevel,and offenders who have completed treatment and onceatthehighschoolagelevel? madeacommitmenttoneverabuseanotherchild can resume healthy lives in the community with- • hold an annual adult education program on outcommittingotheroffenses. sexualabusepreventionforparentsandfamilies Finally,itisnottruethatsexualabusehappens aswellasoneforreligiouseducationteachers? to “other people.” The fact is that a significant • have two adults present in each class or pro- minorityofadultshavesurvivedhistoriesofchild gram for children and youth as well as in cars sexualabuse. transportingyoungpeopletoactivities? Thereareminimumpoliciesthateverycongre- • haveareferrallistofcommunityorganizations gation should consider in order to keep children andtherapistswhospecializeinsexabusepre- and youth safe and to build the foundation for ventionandtreatmentincaseyouneedthem? dealing with a convicted sex offender. Here’s a • havesupportgroupsorcounselingavailableto quickself-assessment.Doesyourcongregation: thosewhohavesurvivedchildsexualabuse? • haveasafecongregationscommitteeorasex- Acongregationwithaseriouscommitmentto ualmisconductandabuseresponseteamwith child sexual abuse prevention will answer yes to primaryresponsibilitiesfortheseissues? eachofthesequestions. • have insurance coverage in the event that a claimofmisconductorabuseoccurs? Responding to Sex Offenders • haveawrittenpolicyaboutsafetypracticesand There are those who believe that a convicted sex procedures? offenderneverbelongsinoneofourcommunities. • have reporting procedures in place for a sus- Thisessaytakesanotherview,basedonareview pectedincidentofabuse? of the literature on sex offenders, interviews with • makesurethattheminister,thereligiousedu- congregations that have successfully integrated a cator, and the board chairperson know the convicted sex offender within adult worship and state laws for reporting concerns about abuse education, and a theological commitment to the BalancingCompassionandProtection 53 dignity and worth of all people, even those who The core response of the congregation to a havecommittedmorallyrepugnantacts.Thepeer- convicted or accused sex offender is a Limited reviewed literature clearly demonstrates that the Access Agreement. The message to the sex vastmajorityoftreatedsexoffendersdonotrepeat offendershouldbethatheiswelcometopartici- their offenses. As religious communities, we can pateinadultworshipandadultsocialandeduca- provide compassion, support, and reconciliation tion activities, but he must covenant with the to those who indicated that they have truly congregation to avoid all contact with children changed and have taken responsibility for their and youth. A draft Limited Access Agreement actions.Webelieveinthehealingpowerofinvolve- that can be adapted is on the UUA web site at mentinaspiritualhome,andinthewordsofone www.uua.org/cde/ethics (click on Resources and affirmation heard in many Unitarian Universalist thenclickonSamplePolicies.) congregations, we commit “to seek the truth in Many congregations already have policies on love and help one another.” We must remember how to deal with disruptive individuals. These thatsexoffenderswhohavecompletedprisonsen- policieshavebeendevelopedfor: tences and mandated treatment and registered • perceivedthreatstothesafetyofother with the state have complied with their punish- members ments according to the court system. As faith- • disruptionofchurchactivities basedcommunities,wecanprovidesupportand • diminishmentoftheappealofthechurchto compassionwithawarenessandvigilancesothat itscurrentandpotentialmembers allaresafe.(Seethecasestudyafterthisessay.) Inmanyways,thepersonwithahistoryofsex Ingeneral,thesepoliciesfirstrequirethemin- offenses has the same needs for a faith commu- ister to meet with the offending individual to nity as the rest of us. But the sex offender needs address the concern. If the behavior continues, moretoassurethathisinvolvementdoesn’tpose theoffendingindividualmaybeaskedtoleavethe arisktothecongregationandprotecthimagainst congregation for a period of time, with reasons falseallegationsandsuspicions.AstheMethodist and the conditions of return made clear. ChurchoftheUnitedKingdomstates, Individuals are generally not excluded from the Suchinvolvementneedstoincludehelping congregation completely except by agreement of him manage his behavior and not get into the board of trustees and the minister, who com- situationswhichinthepastledtooffences municatethedecisiontotheindividual....anoffenderwhotrulywishestopartici- Inthewordsofonepolicy,westrive pate in the life of the church, who realizes tobeaninclusivecommunity,affirmingour theextentofhiscrimeandthedifficultyhis differences in beliefs, opinions, and life presence may cause to survivors, and who experiences. However, concern for the is truly committed to a new life will under- safety and well-being of the congregation stand and accept the need for the imposi- as a whole must be given priority over the tionofrestrictions.” privileges and inclusion of the individual. Thefactisthatapersonwithahistoryofsexual Tothedegree the disruption compromises offense against children should never be allowed thehealthofthiscongregation,ouractions to work with children and youth or socialize with as a people of faith must reflect this children of the congregation. No person who has emphasisonsecurity. been convicted of or accused of (until all charges A policy about disruptive individuals can be have been dismissed)—any sexual misconduct amendedtoincludeasectiononsexoffendersas can be permitted to participate in any religious mostofthesameconditionsapply.Itisgoodprac- educationoryouthgroupactivities. tice for a congregation to develop a draft of a 54 ReligiousEducationandSafety Limited Access Agreement or checklist that can notadequate,arrangeforthepersontobeseen serveasatemplateshouldtheneedarise. for an assessment with an ATSA member at Thereareafewwaysinwhichthepresenceofa yourexpense.Thetherapistandtheparoleoffi- convicted sex offender generally becomes known cer should be asked for their professional inacongregation.Inanidealworld,apersonwith assessmentofthelikelihoodthattheindividual this background would come to the minister will re-offend and whether additional restric- before he started coming to the congregation to tions beyond the standard Limited Access discusslimitsonparticipation.Sexoffendertreat- Agreement need to be placed on the person’s ment specialists often encourage their clients to participation. do just that. One community facing this issue • If the assessment indicates that the person wrote, “The board’s response to this situation hascompletedorisparticipatingsuccessfully wouldhavebeenmadeeasierif,beforebecoming intreatmentandisnotathighriskforrecidi- sodeeplyinvolvedinchurchactivities,theindivid- vism, the next step is to develop a Limited ualhadapproachedourchurch,explainedhissit- AccessAgreement.Iftheprofessionalassess- uation, asked whether there was some arrange- mentwarnsthatthepersonisathighriskfor ment under which he could participate, and then re-offending, it is appropriate to deny that awaitedourresponse.” person involvement in the faith community Thisscenariodoesn’tusuallyhappen.Insome until treatment is successful at reducing the cases,peoplerevealtheirbackgroundstothemin- risk. Meeting with the other support people isters. In other circumstances, one congregant in the offender’s life, such as their family, may discover that another congregant has a his- therapist,andprobationmembers,canpower- toryofsexualoffenses.Congregantsshouldknow fully demonstrate the faith community’s thattheyshouldmaketheirconcernknowntothe desire to support the person and hold them minister.Nomatterhowthesituationisrevealed, accountable. If the person has a partner in thecongregationshouldrespondquicklybytaking thecommunity,thatpersonshouldbeinvolved thefollowingsteps: withdevelopingtheLimitedAccessAgreement • The minister should meet privately with the aswell.Allpersonswithpasthistoriesofsex- individual as soon as possible to discuss the ualoffensesshouldbeaskedtosignaLimited concerns that have been raised. The minister Access Agreement or checklist, upon entry may want to check the local sex offender reg- into the congregation. Depending on the cir- istrybeforemeetingwiththeperson. cumstances,thepersonmaybeaskedtosign • If the minister determines that the concern is oneannually.Iftheoffenderrefusestodoso, justified, the person should then be asked to it is then appropriate to deny the person meet with the Sexual Misconduct and Abuse accesstocongregationfunctionsandchurch Response Team, which ideally would have property. An offender who refuses to sign a beenestablishedbeforehand. Limited Access Agreement should know that if they enter the congregation or its property, • Theindividualshouldbeaskedtosignarelease theywillbeaskedtoleavebyamemberofthe so that the minister can contact their sex ResponseTeamortheBoardofTrustees.Ifthe offender treatment provider and current thera- personfurtherrefuses,thelocalpolicewillbe pist. If not, at minimum they should be calledforassistance. licensed or approved by the state to do work with sex offenders. If the therapist does not • The Response Team should meet at least have this background, it would be wise to ask quarterly with any individual with whom it them more about their experiences in assess- has a Limited Access Agreement to review ingsexoffenders.If youareconcerendthatitis the arrangement and address any concerns. If BalancingCompassionandProtection 55 the minister, religious educator, or chair of the Wecankeepourchildrenandyouthsafefromsex- BoardofTrusteeschanges,itisimportantthat ualabuseandwecanofferministryandacongre- thedepartingpersoninformthenewpersonof gationhometopeoplewhohavebeentreatedsuc- thissituationtoensurecontinuityofawareness cessfully for sexual offenses. We can honor our and continuing pastoral support for the most basic Principle that every person has inher- offender.ItisimportantfortheResponseTeam ent dignity and worth and balance justice, com- todecidewhoneedstoknowaboutanindivid- passion,accountability,andsafety. ual’s history of sexual offense. Clearly key peo- ple,includingtheminister,thereligiouseduca- tor, the board chairperson, and the Response Teamneedtoknowthatthepersonisattending church, that he or she has agreed not to have contactwithchildrenandhassignedaLimited Access Agreement or checklist, and that he or she should never be alone with children and adolescents.Somecongregationshavechosen to tell the entire congregation that a person with a history of sex offenses has joined the church and that there is a Limited Access Agreementinplace.Insomecases,theidentity of the person is withheld to protect their pri- vacy. In other cases, the person’s name is revealed. Reasonsforexcludingapersonwithahistoryof sexoffensefromallcongregationactivitiesinclude: • refusaltogivepermissionfortheminister tocontactthetreatmentproviderandparole officer • refusaltogoforariskassessmentwithaqual- ifiedtherapist • reportbyatreatmentproviderthatthe individualisattoohighariskforrecidivism • refusaltosignaLimitedAccessAgreement • refusaltocomplywiththerequirementsofthe LimitedAccessAgreement Ifanindividuallaterdecidesthattheycancom- plywiththeconditionsforparticipationincongre- gational life, the process of assessment should beginagain. Ifwearetohonorourcommitmentstoprovid- ing a safe place for all to worship, learn, and socialize, the complex and difficult issues sur- rounding people with a history of sexual offense must be addressed seriously and with integrity. 56 ReligiousEducationandSafety Creating Policies with Youth Groups Sarah Gibb When congregations have healthy, viable, active With youth ministry, as with any type of min- programs for youth (ages fourteen to twenty), istry a congregation might undertake, there are both the young people and the congregations risks involved. Some of these risks, like the risk receive incredible benefits. Some of these youth, of abuse, are risks in all of a congregation’s pro- nowyoungadults,havewrittenabouttheirexperi- grams.Others,liketheriskofunderagedrinking, ences.ElizabethMartinoftheFourthUniversalist are more particular to this age group. Some uni- SocietyinNewYorkCitywrites, versal risks need to be emphasized more with youth than with adults. Anyone in a church can In YRUU (Young Religious Unitarian break furniture, but youth are more likely than Universalists), I learned to get along with adultstothinkofusingacouchasatrampoline. others. Youth and adults, together. We Unitarian Universalist youth are at a crucial worshipped, played games, cooked, ate, phase in their religious and social development; talked, and sang. I discovered myself.... I theyaresimultaneouslyempoweredandvulnera- have built friendships I hope to keep for ble. They’ve been raised to think for themselves years to come. Most importantly, my and by their capacities for independence of memories of YRUU continue to make me thought and action are increasing; yet they are feel loved and safe. During the moments vulnerableduetoculturalsexualizationandalack whenIwasinYRUU,Iwassafe. of legal power. Youth in Unitarian Universalist And in a Washington Post article from a few congregations need a safe environment in which yearsago,AshleyWilsonofCedarLaneUnitarian they can share themselves in a genuine way and Universalist Church in Bethesda, Maryland, developasleaders. speaksofherexperience: Unfortunately well-intentioned adult leaders One thing I appreciate is that my church canactuallydiminishyouthsafetybycreatingand believes in full education so individuals enforcing rules in a disempowering way. Our reli- can make their own educated and giousmovementhastoomanyexamplesofyouth informed decisions.... I love my church programsbeingdamagedordismantledbecause because it is so supportive of youth... adults in leadership positions forget that youth this religion has given me a better way to can be their allies in creating safety. Some exam- live my life, exposed me to many wonder- plesincludechurchboardsbarringallyouthfrom fulpeople,educatedandsupportedme. districtconferencesbecauseoneyouthwasfound CreatingPolicieswithYouthGroups 57 smoking marijuana or religious education com- nonetheless.Thecircumstancesofthelifeofthe mittees disallowing youth group overnights church form what she calls an “implicit curricu- becausesomeonebrokeaclassroomwindow. lum.” This implicit curriculum is conveyed to But our movement also has many positive youth in the way the church and its representa- examples of youth and adults working together tives relate to them. Though the explicit curricu- tocreatesafety.Whenapairofyouthplayingtag lum of a church school may be to uphold the atoneyouthconference,youthandadultleaders seven Principles, an implicit curriculum of con- convened to determine who should fix the win- flict and interpersonal power struggle could dowandhelpedidentifyconstructivewaysforthe undermine what the church is attempting to hyperyouthtochanneltheirenergy. teach. For youth, the implicit messages commu- Youth sometimes rebel against rules and nicatedinthecreationofguidelinesandpolicies structures imposed from the outside. It can be can have just as a profound effect upon their alienating for a youth group to be told, “This is faithdevelopmentastheexplicitmessagesabout how things are going to be.” On the other hand, honoring our UU Principles. When the implicit alackofrulesandstructurecanbeequallyalien- curriculum is in line with the explicit curriculum, ating for youth, resulting in chaos and compro- a congregation is more likely to foster youth misingtheirsafety. commitmenttoUnitarianUniversalism. There must be a balance. Youth, like adults, Creating policy well is an essential aspect of haveastronginterestinsafetyinyouthgroupsand doingourjobascongregations.Thereforeascon- atyouthevents.Theycanworkasalliesratherthan gregations set out to discuss, develop, or revise adversaries. In “The Sunday-School: Discourse safety policies that concern youth programs, Pronounced before the Sunday-School Society,” including youth in the process is very important. WilliamElleryChanningwritesthatthegoalinreli- Maybeagroupofadultswouldarriveatthesame gious education with young people is “not to policythatagroupofyouthandadultswould,but imposereligionuponthemintheformofarbitrary creatingdifferentpolicies,ordifferentrules,isnot rules, which rest on no foundation but our own even half of the point of youth inclusion. word and will, but to awaken the conscience, the Primarily,asAngusMacLeantaught,“themethod moral discernment, so that they may discern and is the message.” Inclusion of youth communi- approve for themselves what is everlastingly right cates that their congregation honors them and and good.” Discussions about youth group safety respects their experiences and ideas. Further, are an ideal place to awaken the consciences and whenyouthhavearoleincreatingpolicy,theyare moral decision-making skills of youth. This is a more likely to feel responsible to and abide by it. chancetoseeUUvaluesandPrinciplesinaction. Onbothpracticalandphilosophicallevels,youth Our congregations often take great care to safety is enhanced when policy is created in a offer well-balanced religious education curricula context of youth empowerment in our congrega- for children from preschool to eighth grade. We tions and conferences. Congregations should teach children that ours is a religion of diversity, consider the following elements as youth and respect, and acceptance. We teach children to adultsassembletocreatepoliciestogether. honor and uphold the “inherent worth and dig- Youth Group Staff nity of every person,” and “justice, equity, and compassion in human relations.” Although Who are the adults who advise the youth group? many of our congregations do not use formal Are they volunteer members of the congrega- curriculawithhigh-schoolagedyouth,notedreli- tion?Aretheypaidadvisors?Aretheyonthestaff gious educator Maria Harris, author of Fashion of the church? The answers to these questions Me a People: Curriculum in the Church, reminds canhelptodeterminetheaccountabilityofadults us that these youth are absorbing a curriculum whoworkwithyouthinyourcongregation. 58 ReligiousEducationandSafety Questionssurroundingaccountabilityinclude: enable youth to develop in healthy, caring, and Whoselectsadvisors?Ifthereistroublewhocan responsibleways. fire an advisor? Who supervises adult advisors, In order to staff youth groups responsibly, and how? Who reviews their performance on a adults working with youth must acknowledge regularbasisandoffersfeedback? that they are different from youth and behave Whenestablishingastructureofaccountabil- accordingly. Adults help youth the most not by ity for adults who work with youth, it’s advisable actinglikeyouthbutbyactinglikeadultsandset- toincludeyouthinputinthehiringandselection ting a good example. They must also acknowl- processes as well as feedback and performance edge that certain boundaries between youth and review. Anonymous feedback can also bring up adults are necessary to create and uphold a issues that youth are afraid to talk about in per- healthyyouthgroup. son. The Youth Office publishes a helpful guide Justlikeinthechurchschool,itisadvisableto for this process, “Seven Steps to Hiring a Youth havemorethanoneadultwithyouthatalltimes. Advisor,”availableatwww.uua.org/YRUU. This helps to protect youth from abusive or Adultsworkingwiththeyouthgroupmustsign manipulative situations as two adults can acodeofethicsunder“Resources”ontheabove. “check” each others’ behavior. The presence of It is also recommended that youth advisors con- more than one youth can serve the same pur- sent to a criminal background check or at least a pose. In some cases, youth may want to meet sex offender background check. Church Mutual, privately with an advisor for a variety of reasons. aninsurancecarrierusedbymanycongregations, In such situations, it’s advisable to meet in a offers background screening for employees and public place, such as a mall or a coffee shop, or volunteers(seewww.churchmutual.com). atthechurchwithothersnearby. In staffing a youth group, many congrega- For many Unitarian Universalist youth, the tionsoftenfindthemselveswithoutmanywilling opportunity to give and receive hugs and affec- adultsto choose from. Therefore if an adult with tion at youth group is vital. Touch is so sexual- littleornobackgroundinyouthworkwantstobe ized in other contexts that it can be a real joy to an advisor, advisor training can be very valuable. havefriendsinYRUUwhomtheycancaressand Formoreseasonedadvisors,YRUUnowoffersa snuggle with without it being “a sexual thing.” leveltwoadvisortraining(seewww.uua.org/YRUU Adults who work with youth may crave this kind to locate a training location near you). Training ofcasualaffectiontoo.Howeverthepowerdiffer- coverssuchissuesasethicalbehaviorandsafety entialbetweenyouthandadultsmakesitimpos- as well as more basic items like how to lead sible for adults to participate in hugs or backrub youthgroupactivities. circlesas“justoneofthegang.”Evenwellinten- Congregations can also set policies concern- tioned adults can get themselves in trouble in ing the ratio of youth to adults in the youth pro- this area because youth can feel violated by an gram. Typical rations are ten youth to one adult adult’shugeventhoughtheymightfeelcomfort- and seven youth to one adult. At Con Con, an ablewithsimilarhugsfromotheryouth. annual continental YRUU conference, a ratio of “Jack,” an advisor who saw himself as loving tenyouthtooneadultisinplace.Suchratiosare andkindwouldwalkuptofemaleyouthincoffee establishednotbecauseadultsneedtosupervise hour,puthisarmaroundtheirwaists,andstroke youthorrunalltheiractivitiesbutbecauseyouth their hair as he chatted with them and their community is enriched by the positive participa- friends.Thegirlsprobablywouldn’thaveminded tion of adults. The Search Institute’s research, thesamebehaviorbyanotheryouth.Butthegirls published in “Forty Developmental Assets,” indi- inthisyouthgroupfelt,understandably,extremely cates that support from “three or more nonpar- uncomfortable with the advisor’s behavior. He ent adults” is one of the building blocks that was twenty years older than they were. “It just CreatingPolicieswithYouthGroups