12 Friendships Your boundaries are a reflection of how willing you are to advocate for the life that you want. “I hate my job,” Dave told his friend Kevin on their way home from work. As Kevin listened to Dave complain about his workday, his wife, and people in general, he felt drained and stuck. He loved his friend, but every time Dave called, Kevin took a deep breath before answering. He knew what was in store. At least twice a week, he participated in a one-sided conversation with Dave. Yet whenever Kevin needed something, it was Dave who showed up to help. They’d been best friends since high school, and despite not going to the same college, they kept in touch. Since both of them had a thirty-minute drive home, they got into the rhythm of talking twice a week and texting throughout the day. Kevin thought Dave was funny, outgoing, and fun to be around. But he couldn’t stand Dave’s constant complaining. Instead of truly being engaged in the conversation, Kevin said “mm-hmm” a lot and rarely provided feedback. He dreaded their calls but didn’t think it would be nice to say anything or try to change the pattern of their communication. Kevin considered himself a relatively assertive, take-charge type of person, but he couldn’t fathom hurting his best friend’s feelings. He wanted to preserve their friendship while creating some distance in their interactions. He tried ignoring some of Dave’s calls, but when Dave said, “I called you earlier,” Kevin felt he had to give a valid reason for not answering his phone. Since he didn’t have a valid reason, however, he continued answering. “What can I do, without feeling guilty about not picking up his calls?” Kevin asked me. Immediately, we began talking about ways to respond and how to manage his discomfort. I told him that even though easing his discomfort wouldn’t happen overnight, the more he practiced setting a boundary, the more assured he would feel. Initially, I asked Kevin to start talking more about himself to see if that would shift the dialogue. He noticed that helped some, but Dave still complained most of the time. Then I asked Kevin to steer the conversation by saying, “Tell me something good that happened today.” That strategy helped as well, but Dave still complained. Kevin decided he could handle talking to Dave once a week for fifteen minutes instead of their usual thirty minutes. For the most part, Kevin stuck to what we discussed. When he didn’t, however, he immediately suffered the consequences of a draining dialogue for thirty minutes twice a week. Set a Boundary or Suffer the Consequences of Not Setting One Outside of family, friendships are the hardest relationships in which to implement boundaries. Your friends are often open with you about who offended them and how they felt. This makes it very difficult to set a boundary if you believe it’s the exact thing they’re likely to perceive as mean or offensive. But there is hope, and many friendships have survived these requests. Perhaps your friends will as well. And remember, if a relationship ends because of a boundary, it’s a sign of a bigger problem. According to my Instagram Stories polls, 81 percent of people have had an issue with the way friends talk about their dating habits. When problems are not addressed and boundaries are not set, relationship challenges persist. Our relationships are a reflection of our boundaries or lack thereof. Other people have no idea of our listening capacity or emotional capacity, so it’s up to us to use our words and behaviors to make them aware. How do we exercise our boundaries guilt-free? Again, we can’t. But they are like muscles. The more we set them, the easier they become to set and maintain. We assume our friends will be heartbroken if we set a boundary. This is probably because we hear them complain about how others treat them. But is it possible they might be responsible for some of the issues they have with others? I had a friend in college who complained about the things her boyfriend and other friends said about her. For a while, I listened, but then I started to evaluate the truth of these statements about her. It wasn’t my job to tell my friend she was wrong, but I also didn’t have to listen to her whine about how others had wronged her. It wasn’t necessarily “nice” of me to pretend to listen to her while saying “mm-hmm” repeatedly, so I started to shift the conversations toward other topics. To be present, it was vital for me to connect with her on subjects that created an engaging dialogue between us. I liked many things about her and didn’t want to end our relationship, so steering our discussions in a different direction allowed me to create a healthier friendship with her. How do you know the difference between a healthy and an unhealthy friendship? Signs of a Healthy Friendship Your friend wants to see you grow. The friendship is mutually supportive. The friendship is mutually beneficial. Your friendship evolves as you evolve. You understand how to support each other. Setting boundaries doesn’t threaten the friendship. Your friend is happy for you to be yourself. Your friend acknowledges your quirks and works around them. You can talk to your friend about your feelings. Signs of an Unhealthy Friendship The relationship is competitive. You exhibit your worst behavior when you’re with your friend. You feel emotionally drained after connecting with your friend. Your friend tries to embarrass you in front of others. You don’t have anything in common. Your friend shares details of your personal life with others. The friendship is not reciprocal (i.e., you give more than you receive). You’re unable to work through disagreements. Your friend doesn’t respect your boundaries. The relationship is enmeshed/codependent. Dealing with Complaining Complaining falls into one of three categories: venting, problem-solving, or ruminating. Venting is a way to talk about issues without seeking guidance but to simply let out your frustrations. Problem-solving is seeking guidance or advice on how to correct an issue. Ruminating is talking about the same issues over and over without trying to problem-solve or work through your frustrations in any real way. Ruminating is essentially dumping on others. Rarely do I hear people have an issue with venting or problem-solving. It’s rumination that becomes an issue. Almost everyone complains about something, but the frequency matters. No one enjoys hearing someone ruminate about the same thing repeatedly. The friend who complains all the time does so without limitation because we have provided a space for it. Ways to Deal with a Chronic Complainer Empathize when appropriate. Redirect the conversation by changing the subject. Be intentional in your dialogue, and stay on topic. Lead by example; don’t complain. Ask before offering an opinion, and be mindful of whether the person can handle the truth. Don’t be dismissive (e.g., “It isn’t so bad” or “You’ll get over it”). After you’ve done all you can, draw a clear boundary around the time allotted for the conversation and how often you will talk. What to Say to Someone When You Don’t Want to Give Them Advice “I’m not sure how to help you with that.” “That sounds like a big issue. Have you thought about talking it over with this person who is bothering you?” “How have you thought about handling the situation?” “What I would do is completely biased and based on me. I’d like to explore what you could do in this situation.” If you are the person complaining, it’s also helpful to set some boundaries with yourself. How to Manage Chronic Complaining Pay attention to how often you complain. State whether you’re simply venting or looking for feedback. Consciously consider the purpose of your conversations with people. Work through feelings by journaling, which is beneficial. Reasons Behind Boundary Issues in Friendships The older we become, the harder it is to create new friendships and renegotiate old ones. It particularly becomes harder to make friends after we reach thirty. As we grow older, our ability to nurture and give time to our friendships competes with parenting, work, romance, and family relationships. After thirty, people often experience internal shifts in how they approach friendships. Self-discovery gives way to self-knowledge, so you become pickier about the people you surround yourself with, according to Marla Paul, author of the book The Friendship Crisis: Finding, Making, and Keeping Friends When You’re Not a Kid Anymore. “The bar is higher than when we were younger and were willing to meet almost anyone for a margarita,” she says. We tend to overthink the interactions more. “Will they like me?” or “Did I say the right thing?” When we maintain a friendship for ten years or more, we become accustomed to specific roles in the relationship. Therefore, shifting our boundaries seems like a betrayal of the relationship. But people change all the time. As we grow in friendships, other areas of our lives likely grow as well. With my friends from high school, we’ve had to learn to adjust as we transitioned to college, our first “real” jobs, serious dating relationships, and perhaps marriage and children. All life changes require a shift in boundaries, and some relationships don’t survive the changes. The dismissal is perhaps an indication of a crack in the foundation of the relationship, not the result of the new request. As we change, it’s simply natural for some friendships to fall away. Common Boundary Issues in Friendships Being the Relationship Adviser I once had a friend who insisted on sharing her relationship issues with me. I kindly asked her not to share the ins and outs of her relationship with me because it was making me feel jaded toward her boyfriend. Initially, she didn’t understand. But after my consistent redirection, she got the point. Setting this boundary didn’t ruin our friendship. Our relationship would have suffered if I had continued to listen and shared my honest feedback. It wouldn’t have been healthy for either of us. Nothing requires you to be the dating expert for your friends. You can listen, share stories, and help them problem-solve. But if doing any of those things makes you feel uncomfortable, you can shift gears. Loaning Money and Possessions “My friend always wants to borrow money. How should I handle this?” Possible Boundaries Set your expectation up front: “I will loan you ____ with the expectation that you’ll pay it back by ____. If, for any reason, you can’t meet my deadline, give me a heads-up at least the day before.” “I’m not able to loan you any money.” “I’m not able to give you ____, but I can offer ____.” Keep in mind that when you loan money and possessions, you’re making yourself a lending source for others. If you don’t want to be a lending source, stop offering your resources. Offering Unsolicited Advice and Feedback “I don’t like my friend’s wife. What should I do?” Possible Boundary Learn to coexist peacefully. Your friend won’t leave his partner just because you don’t like her. Telling him will likely cause an unnecessary rift, because it’s an issue that can’t be resolved. Getting Burned Out from Advice-Giving “My friend is always dating the same kind of person. I’ve told her over and over that she needs to date a different type.” Possible Boundaries You’ve told her what you think, and she isn’t listening. Stop repeating yourself. Bite your tongue when your opinion isn’t valued. Allow people to make their own mistakes and experience their own outcomes. Receiving Unsolicited Advice and Feedback “My friend is always telling me what to do with my life. How do I make them stop?” Possible Boundaries Stop inviting them in. Share less. Your friends respond to what you tell them. Say, “I need you to listen to me. I don’t want any advice or feedback.” Tell them that you want to vent without being given any advice or comments. Dealing with a Needy Friend “My friend constantly wants me to do things with them, and it’s excruciating.” Possible Boundaries Stop agreeing to show up in a way that you can’t maintain long-term. Allow for healthy distance in your friendship with time together and apart. Decide which things you enjoy doing with this friend, and do only what you enjoy with them. You Are Not a Therapist—You’re a Friend Unfortunately, in friendships, there’s often an expectation that we can talk about all things. This expectation sets many of us up for disappointment, because no one knows everything about every topic. Instead, friends offer 100 percent biased advice based on their own experience. In some cases, it’s fine to tell people what you would do if you were in their situation. But when a friend is ruminating or stuck on a particular issue, the best thing you can do is refer your friend to an expert. Times that you may want to refer someone to a therapist include the following: Your friend seems stuck on a specific issue, talking about it over and over. Your friend discusses unresolved trauma. Your friend is experiencing prolonged grief. Your friend is a danger to themselves or others. You notice symptoms of depression, anxiety, or other mental health issues. Your friend is talking about their relationship, and you feel inept at helping. When people need therapy but come to you instead, do this: Remember that you are a friend, not a therapist in your relationships. Offer them resources to get started, such as books or contact information for therapists or support groups. Once you have given them the resources, set boundaries around how much and how often you will allow them to vent to you. Let them know that you’ve assisted them in the ways that you believe to be most helpful. Encourage them to seek help by emphasizing that you are not equipped to help them appropriately. Ask if they followed through on the resources you suggested. Whether your friend needs therapy, a mechanic, a nurse, etc., leave the expertise to the experts. Enmeshment Does Not Make You a Good Friend In high school, I was given the book The Value in the Valley, by Iyanla Vanzant. In her chapter titled “The Valley of O.P.P. (Other People’s Problems),” Vanzant notes: We are not indebted to anyone in this life. We are accountable to some, responsible for others. We are never, however, obligated to take the weight of another’s life on our shoulders. Reading those words in high school was quite helpful, but in college, when I began to separate myself from other people’s problems, it felt like a huge weight was lifted off my chest. For years, I, too, believed that being a “good friend” meant dealing with my friends’ problems as if they were my own. It’s important to realize that your friends’ issues are not your issues. Overly entangling yourself in other people’s problems is not an indicator of how much you love them. Instead, it shows your lack of healthy boundaries. You can be there for people without entangling yourself in their feelings, solutions, and outcomes. The most loving thing you can do is listen. The most empowering thing you can do is allow people to work through their own problems. When you find yourself ruminating about someone else’s issues, stop and remind yourself that the issues aren’t yours. Tune in to your feelings and why you might be stuck on someone else’s problems. Enmeshment is a distraction from real ways that we can help others and be there for them. You have never helped anyone by worrying about them and thinking endlessly about their problems. Dealing with Chronic Boundary Violators As I’ve said, people will do what you allow, and they will do it over and over again until you stop them. It’s true that you can’t control what people do to you, but you can manage your reaction and what you tolerate. Being healthy will require you to Eliminate toxic people from your life Minimize the frequency of your interactions with unhealthy people Do things alone rather than with unhealthy people Make hard choices about how you choose to spend your time Try something different because the same approach yields the same results Set clear expectations at the beginning of a new friendship Build new relationships with healthy people Repeat your boundaries more than once (or move on because people are unwilling/unable to honor yours) Sometimes, we have to end unhealthy relationships because the other person refuses to accept our boundaries. It’s never easy to leave a relationship, even when it’s unhealthy or no longer fits who we are. We often stay stuck in relationships because we hyperfocus on returning the friendship to how it used to be. But if we have changed, the relationship may no longer be appropriate for the person we’ve become. It’s hard to determine the best time to end a relationship, and the truth is that there is no “best” time. Of course, there are poorly chosen times, such as after a huge life event. But perfect timing may never come. These things may need to happen before you leave an unhealthy relationship: You may need to give up trying to think of ways to fix something that can’t be fixed. You may need to get tired of talking to your friends about the same problems. You may need to get tired of having values that you aren’t honoring. You may need to ask for what you want, see it happen temporarily, and notice that the changes are short-lived. You may need to figure out how to exist without this person in your life. You may need to realize that the bad outweighs the good. You may need to be honest with yourself about how the relationship is impacting your wellness. Friendships are ended in the following ways: Ghosting, which is vanishing from the relationship with no explanation, not answering calls, and ignoring all attempts to connect. Some people feel most comfortable with this form of passive communication if the other person is likely to allow them to walk away quietly without confrontation. Not quite recovering from a massive blowup but keeping the friendship alive on life support. Basically, it’s sort of over, but there’s some occasional interaction. Allowing things to fizzle out quietly. This method is preferred by many because nothing has to be said or done. It’s an amicable agreement to take time and space away from the relationship. Having a conversation to air out frustrations and verbalize openly that the relationship is over. You know your friends. You know which friends can handle a closing conversation and which ones can’t. Choose the method that’s best for you and the other person. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. Describe your idea of a healthy friendship. Identify with whom you have healthy friendships. List your unhealthy friendships and define what makes them unhealthy. Determine what needs to be said or done to improve the friendship.