9 What Are You Doing to Honor Your Boundaries? Before we teach others to respect our boundaries, we must learn to honor them ourselves. Kyle received a raise, and as soon as the money hit his bank account, he was off to get a new car. As far as he was concerned, he deserved that car for all his hard work during the year. He believed in working hard and rewarding himself for it. In fact, every time he got a bonus or raise, he treated himself to a new, expensive gift—watches, designer clothes, and sometimes vacations. Yet despite what it looked like on the outside, Kyle lived paycheck to paycheck and was drowning in twenty-five thousand dollars of credit card debt. He had no savings, and he regularly borrowed money from his father to stay afloat. He hated the idea of not being able to splurge on whatever he wanted, but he suffered the consequences of that attitude. Kyle began seeing me at the urging of his father, following a brush with late car payments. He had agreed to get a grip on his finances. He appeared before me well dressed and intelligent, but broke. At first, he was hesitant to open up to me because he didn’t see the point. He thought that if he just got through the next few months, everything would be fine. “How often have you said that to yourself?” I asked him. He seemed shocked. He knew he had a pattern of overspending, but he had to admit that every time his financial situation got bad, he’d say to himself, “I just need to get through the next few months.” Unfortunately, those months turned into years of overspending his money and the need to be bailed out by his father. Even when Kyle made more money, he spent it on something bigger and better than what he’d had before. Kyle was just unable to say no to himself. The thought of depriving himself made him cringe. During our second visit, I had him list his long-term financial goals. He included saving for retirement, buying a home, paying off his car, and retiring early. After he completed his list, I asked, “Now, how do you plan to meet those goals?” Kyle spoke about how these were long-term goals, not anything he’d be able to achieve in the next year or two. After further discussion, I discovered that he’d had these same goals five years earlier, but he hadn’t made any forward movement toward them. His goals were unattainable because he had unhealthy boundaries with his finances. As long as he spent money right when he received it, he wouldn’t be able to move beyond living paycheck to paycheck. Knowing that he had goals to spend his money more wisely, we began to talk about useful boundaries that might help him achieve those goals, such as saving, spending less, and delaying gratification. The Significance of Having Boundaries with Yourself It’s hard to change your habits if you never change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are. —James Clear When we think about boundaries, we tend to think about what others need to do to make things better for us. While other people indeed have an impact on our lives, we make personal choices daily that affect the quality of our lives and who we are. With self-boundaries, we consider how we impact ourselves. Kyle was choosing to be an overspender, and he was the only person responsible for it. He was the one who decided to buy things he couldn’t afford, so he needed to implement boundaries for himself and his spending if he wanted to be healthier and reach his financial goals. Kyle’s financial issues are hardly unique. According to Debt.org, the average American carries a credit card balance of $8,398 and has at least four credit cards. The total U.S. consumer debt is $13.86 trillion, which includes mortgages, auto loans, credit cards, and student loans. A recent Charles Schwab study showed that 59 percent of Americans live paycheck to paycheck. Far too many Americans live without savings, emergency funds, or retirement funds. When they experience a small financial setback, everything can fall apart. It’s a boundary issue because we lack the willingness to tell ourselves no to whatever we want. But it’s dangerous to say yes to every urge without limits. This doesn’t happen because we want to damage ourselves, but because we lack healthy self-boundaries. The ability to say no to yourself is a gift. If you can resist your urges, change your habits, and say yes to only what you deem truly meaningful, you’ll be practicing healthy self-boundaries. It’s your responsibility to care for yourself without excuses. Here is a list of some areas where self-boundaries are helpful: Your finances Your time management Your self-care The treatment you allow from others Your thoughts (yes, you can stop talking to yourself in an unkind way, just like you might stop someone else from being mean to you) Your reactions The people you allow in your life Finances Kyle and only Kyle can change the way he views his finances and spends his money. In our sessions, we talked about helpful beliefs versus harmful beliefs. He acknowledged that his beliefs about money were destructive, as he had to borrow money, was in debt, and struggled financially, despite making a decent income. In our work together, he began to adopt more helpful beliefs about money, such as “I don’t have to spend every penny I earn.” Kyle also began creating self-boundaries, like these: “I will save 10 percent before buying myself something new.” “I will create a budget for my spending and use the budget as a guide to curb impulse purchases.” “I will not spend more without having money saved, even if I earn more.” Kyle’s new limits gave him structure around how to manage his money. Before setting these limits, he didn’t think beyond the moment and suffered the consequences later. Although imposing boundaries on his finances created limitations, it also provided relief and helped Kyle move more swiftly toward his financial goals. Another critical boundary around finances is learning when to say yes and no to others who seek to borrow or use you as a financial resource. Boundaries to Consider I will not loan money to anyone if I can’t afford to offer it as a gift. I will cosign a loan for someone only under the following conditions: ____. I will not cosign for anyone. I will establish emergency savings. Remember, people can ask you for anything, but it’s up to you to maintain your boundaries by saying no or setting limits as to how much and how little you can help them. Time Management A lack of self-discipline is symbolic of the lack of self-boundaries. At this very moment, I have a screensaver on my phone that reads “I don’t have time to waste time.” I set this reminder to prevent myself from wasting valuable time on my phone checking social media, shopping online, and browsing the internet. It isn’t wrong to do those things, but it’s essential for me to use my device intentionally. I make time to use social media, shop online, and browse the internet when it makes sense for me. I just try to avoid doing it while I’m supposed to be writing a book, for example. I love to read articles and books and listen to podcasts about time management. But truthfully, they all say the same thing: manage your distractions, plan wisely, and cut back on things that are a waste of time. Simply put, your boundaries around how you manage your time are the solution to your time-management issues. Boundaries to Consider I admit to myself that I can’t do everything. I will stop trying to do everything and ease into doing what I can without overbooking myself. I will check my calendar before I say yes to any request. I plan to be on time by giving myself more time than I need. I delegate what I can, especially the things I don’t need to do myself. I put myself on a schedule, write the schedule down, and stick to it religiously. I plan my day. I put realistic plans into place to avoid distractions. If you struggle to manage your time, ask yourself, “What am I doing currently, versus what would I like to do instead?” Create new boundaries (habits and rules), and work toward becoming the person you’d like to be. Self-Care Self-care is how you nurture and restore your mind, body, and spirit. The key word here is “self,” so making time to care for yourself is entirely up to you. Don’t confuse self-care, however, with treating yourself to lavish gifts and pampering yourself. In some instances you may choose for that to be a part of your regimen, but real acts of self-care have little to do with spending money. Instead, they’re about showing up for yourself by setting boundaries. Boundaries to Consider I say no to things I don’t like. I say no to things that don’t contribute to my growth. I say no to things that rob me of valuable time. I spend time around healthy people. I reduce my interactions with people who drain my energy. I protect my energy against people who threaten my sanity. I practice positive self-talk. I allow myself to feel and not judge my feelings. I forgive myself when I make a mistake. I actively cultivate the best version of myself. I turn off my phone when appropriate. I sleep when I’m tired. I mind my business. I make tough decisions because they’re healthy for me. I create space for activities that bring me joy. I say yes to activities that interest me despite my anxiety about trying them. I experience things alone instead of waiting for the “right” people to join me. Treatment We Allow from Others “People are always taking advantage of me.” I hear this frequently in my office. But are they? The real question is, How are you allowing people to take advantage of you? How are you allowing people to take advantage of you? It’s your job to maintain the standard of how others treat you. After all, people are getting their cue from you as to what’s tolerable in your relationship with them. Tell them and show them how you want to be treated, and model what you want by treating yourself well. Boundaries to Consider When people raise their voice at me, I tell them it’s not okay. I address issues when they arise instead of allowing them to fester. When a boundary is violated, I clearly define my expectations for communication in the beginning and throughout my relationships. Example: “I’d prefer if we talked about serious matters in person instead of over text.” When I notice that someone is trying to manipulate me by intentionally trying to guilt me or pushing my boundaries, I recognize it as manipulation and uphold my boundaries. When someone says something about me that isn’t true, I immediately correct them. Example: They might say, “You’re always late.” You might respond: “I was late today. However, there are other times, such as ____, when I’ve been on time.” Don’t argue; just state what you know to be true. Thoughts Yes, just like you might stop someone else from talking to you a certain way, you can stop talking to yourself in a certain way. What are your standards for how you speak to yourself—self-talk and inner dialogue—as well as how you talk about yourself in the presence of others? It may seem corny, but giving yourself a pep talk can be beneficial. Mantras for Self-Kindness “It will be okay.” “I did my best.” “They didn’t deserve me.” Turn that energy inward by setting a boundary to speak to yourself in a gentle, kind, and loving way. Making self-deprecating statements is another way that you may be speaking unkindly about yourself. When you make disparaging comments or cruel jokes about yourself, you give others license to do the same to you. So be mindful of what you say about yourself in front of others. Boundaries to Consider I speak to myself as gently as I would talk to a small child. I coach myself through awkward moments. I allow myself to make mistakes without judging myself harshly. I don’t call myself names. I don’t make mean comments about myself either in my mind or out loud in front of others. Reactions Make a promise to yourself to set boundaries with regard to how you respond to situations. I know this may seem difficult, since things can happen unexpectedly or people can piss you off in the moment. But just because you feel angry doesn’t mean you have to yell. Shouting is a choice you make to display that you’re mad. Yet plenty of angry people make the choice to cry, take deep breaths, walk away, or phone a friend to process their feelings. You can decide how you want to deal with uncomfortable feelings and experiences. Boundaries to Consider I don’t hit people or any property when I’m upset. If I feel the need to cry, I allow myself to do so. When I get agitated, I remove myself from the situation and practice my breathing until I feel calm. People You Allow in Your Life “I always date men who cheat,” Nancy said to me during a session. She had a type—a womanizer she would try to “fix.” She couldn’t see that in selecting the same type of man over and over, she was inviting a dynamic she claimed she didn’t want. According to the Journal of Marriage and Family Studies: 57 percent of men overall admit to committing infidelity at some point in their lives. 54 percent of women overall admit to committing infidelity in one or more of their relationships. 22 percent of married men admit to having an affair at least once during their marriages. 14 percent of married women admit to having an affair at least once during their marriages. Of course, not everyone cheats. But Nancy repeatedly landed herself in relationships with men who cheated. Despite knowing the red flags of dating someone who isn’t healthy, she went against her better judgment and dated guys she knew weren’t good for her. Yet each time, she hoped the situation would end differently. It didn’t, so she found herself asking the same question over and over: “Why does everyone cheat on me?” The answer is that Nancy’s boundaries were porous. She would allow people to do things she didn’t like. Then she’d become resentful and angry. But when she came to me, she was finally ready to start a healthy relationship. The bottom line is that you don’t have to have relationships with types of people you don’t like. Doing so is a choice. At least to some degree, you can curate and create the types of relationships you want by adhering to boundaries that will make your life easier. If you notice that you attract the same type of person (people) over and over, ask yourself: What is it about me that attracts ____ type of people? What is this person trying to teach me about myself? What am I trying to work through in this relationship? Boundaries to Consider I create an idea of the type of people I want in my life. When I notice issues in my relationships, I honor myself by speaking up. Upholding Boundaries When we want people to respect our boundaries, it may be necessary to repeat them. As I’ve said, setting a boundary is just the first step of implementing it. The other and often more challenging step is following through if someone violates it. For example, let’s say you’ve told your mother you’d like her to call before coming over, but she shows up without any notice. It’s important to stick to your boundary by issuing a consequence. If you don’t honor it by allowing your mother to violate it, she’ll continue with the violation, and you’ll likely feel resentful. I know you’re probably thinking, “But it’s my mom! I can’t issue a consequence with my mother.” Yes, you can. You always have options with boundaries, even if those options make you feel uncomfortable. Perhaps you don’t want to pretend you’re not home. But what if you opened the door and said something like “Mom, I was clear about wanting you to call before coming. I’m not prepared for guests. Do you want to set up another time that’s more convenient for both of us to hang out?” If you don’t uphold your boundaries, others won’t either. You can’t tell a friend “I need you to stick to our drink maximum of three drinks tonight” if you then proceed to have five drinks. In that case, you aren’t modeling what you requested. Exhibit the boundaries you wish to see in the world. If you don’t uphold your boundaries, others won’t either. Another way to uphold your boundaries is to say no more often. Recognize that saying no to others is saying yes to yourself. Set a limit by saying no when you can’t honor a request, don’t want to honor it, or doing so will infringe on the time you have for what you enjoy. If you’ve said no, and people aren’t listening, tell them to stop asking. That’s right, tell them to STOP. Remember that people keep asking because they are trying to get you to eventually say yes. Also, make sure you’re not leading people on by saying things like “maybe” or “I’ll see,” neither of which means no. If you’re clear you don’t want to do something, say “stop” when people continue to ask after you’ve said no. Consider this: When you engage in activities that you don’t enjoy, you are taking time away from yourself. When you get distracted with other people’s stuff, you take time away from yourself. When you spend time that you don’t have to spare, you take time away from your goals. Saying yes to yourself may look like Foregoing an extra hour of television when you know you need to get up early Staying hydrated Saying no to invitations you don’t wish to honor Adhering to a monthly budget Taking regular breaks and not working yourself to the bone Going on affordable vacations Allowing yourself to feel your feelings without judging them as good or bad Setting a “do not disturb” on your phone after 8:00 p.m. Taking care of your physical health by going to the doctor and taking medication as prescribed Taking care of your mental health by going to therapy Resting when your body needs it Reading for pleasure, not with the intent to learn or grow a new skill Finding healthy ways to manage your emotions Maintaining good financial habits like paying bills on time and not racking up debt from buying things you don’t need or things that can wait until you can truly afford them Keeping Your Word to Yourself Setting limits with yourself is a conscious act that will make your life easier. Rules seem restrictive, but when you create them, you can include nuance. Therefore, having boundaries with yourself is not a restriction. Instead, they help you achieve your goal, build healthy relationships, and live according to your values. When you don’t keep your word to yourself, you are engaging in self-sabotage, self-betrayal, or people-pleasing. Self-sabotage Procrastinating Getting close to a goal and quitting Staying in relationships that are unhealthy Not keeping your word to yourself Setting unrealistic goals Not trying Carrying a negative narrative (story) about yourself and your abilities Self-sabotage is just one way that we dishonor our boundaries with ourselves. It involves engaging in unhealthy behaviors that keep us from what we say we want. Self-sabotage first starts in the way we talk to ourselves. For example, we often talk ourselves out of trying before we even start. Once we start to talk to ourselves negatively, we commit to those negative thoughts as truth. We may say, “I can’t,” but we’re capable of accomplishing more than we believe we can do. The “I can’t” narrative leads to procrastination, not trying, quitting, setting unrealistic goals, and/or negative self-talk. So in the story you tell about yourself, incorporate an “I can” narrative. Don’t quit before you start. Here are some examples of what not to say: “I’m going to try to stop drinking for thirty days.” “I’ll see how long I can stick to drinking more water.” “I’ll share my boundary with them, but I’m one hundred percent sure they won’t listen.” In other words, use direct language without ambivalence about what will happen. Here are assertive examples of self-boundary statements: “I’m going to quit drinking for thirty days.” “I can change my habits.” “I’m drinking more water, starting today.” “I’m capable of following through.” “Please respect my boundaries.” Confidence in your boundaries is the cure for self-sabotage. Self-betrayal Changing who you are and what you believe in order to stay in relationships with others Pretending to be someone other than who you really are Comparing yourself with others (friends, family, strangers on the internet, a past version of yourself) Failing to consistently maintain your values Making negative statements about yourself to others or in your head With self-betrayal, we dishonor ourselves by failing to live according to our values or failing to show up as an authentic human being. Guilt then sets in, because we know deep down that we’re acting inauthentically. In healthy relationships, it’s acceptable for you to be yourself. People-Pleasing People-pleasing is making others happy at the cost of our own happiness. It happens because we want to be accepted by others. Those of us who are people-pleasers assume that others won’t like it when we advocate for what we want. Therefore, we pretend to go along in an effort to be accepted by others. But healthy people appreciate honesty and don’t abandon us if we say no. For example, Charlotte asked me, “Is it okay for me to tell people to stop asking me when I’m getting married?” Yes! Her life isn’t an open book. She doesn’t have to answer any question that makes her feel uncomfortable. It’s okay to create boundaries about what you share with others. For example, you don’t have to share any of the following: Why you aren’t married yet Your relationship status When you’re having a baby If you already have kids, when you’re having more kids What’s next in your life How you spend your time How much money you make How you spend your money Your lifestyle Your weight (loss or gain) Insert your own example here: ____________ Insert another one here: ____________ You get to decide what you feel comfortable sharing as well as which people you wish to tell your personal business to. On Instagram, I’m often asked deeply personal questions, and when I don’t want to answer them, I have the privilege of ignoring them. If you don’t want to answer a question, consider doing this: Respond with a question: “That’s an interesting question; what prompted you to ask me that?” Turn the question back on them: “Do you want more kids?” Change the topic by glossing over the question: “Money is always such an interesting topic. What are you watching on Netflix?” Be direct: “I don’t feel comfortable answering that question.” Make your boundaries clear: “I don’t like it when people talk to me about weight.” Remember, you have a choice about what conversations you are willing to have with others. The Power of Refreshing and Restating Your Boundaries Refreshing As humans, we change, and our boundaries change with us. It’s okay if your tolerance for certain things in your relationship changes. You can create new expectations. When this happens, you can say, “____ is no longer working for me; I would like ____.” You can also ease up on the boundaries you previously set. For example, if you decide you won’t stay at work past 6:00 p.m., you can stay longer on occasion if you wish. Consider this: What has prompted me to shift my boundaries? Is this a temporary or permanent shift? How will shifting my boundary impact my goals for myself? Will changing my boundary continue to honor who I am in my relationships? Restating Over time, people may assume that your boundaries with them have expired. Remind them (as well as yourself) about your expectations, including why they were set. Know that the changes you see in the other person are a direct result of your boundaries in the relationship. If, over time, you find yourself reneging on the limits you set, remember how they positively impacted your life. Recommit to them, and proceed with honoring them. You can’t change people, but you can change How you deal with them What you accept How you react to them How often you interact with them How much space you allow them to take up What you participate in What role they play in your life What people you have contact with Who you allow in your life Your perspective Consistency Is Key From time to time, you may not honor your boundaries. But when you find yourself in a rut, get out. I know that sounds easier said than done, but remember that you don’t have to commit to staying down. The moment that you begin to notice that you aren’t honoring your boundaries, get right back to keeping your word to yourself. If you’ve labeled yourself as a person who can’t stick to things, you will be “a person who can’t stick to things.” So change the narrative of who you’ve told yourself you are by removing the negative connotations. Instead, say, “I’m a person who sticks to things.” The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person who is this. —James Clear, Atomic Habits Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. What type of person do you want to be? Become who you want to be, and introduce that version of yourself to the rest of the world. Create a list of boundaries you’d like to implement for yourself. For example, “Save more money.” Next to each one, identify one actionable step to help you uphold your boundary. Example: “Start a savings account, and add $30 per month to it.”