Commonly Asked Questions What’s a good boundary for a toxic mother that you aren’t ready to cut off? When you’re aware that a relationship is unhealthy but you aren’t ready to leave that relationship, you can maintain self-boundaries around how you choose to engage with the other person. Boundary suggestions: Consider speaking to your mother less often. Instead of daily, try a few times a week or once a week. Limit the length of the conversations. An easy way to do this could be creating a hard out, such as talking to your mother on the way to an appointment. You’ll have to end the call when you arrive at your destination. Respond when you’re ready and willing to talk, not every single time your mother calls or texts. Is it necessary to explain to a friend or family member why you’re creating distance or that you want to cut them off? You know your people best. Some will listen while you explain, and some will attack you or defend themselves. Be mindful of the type of person you’re addressing before deciding to talk about issues. If the situation is likely to become volatile, it may not be in your best interest to speak to the person face-to-face. Perhaps sharing your desires via text is best. When possible, try to slowly distance yourself from them, as this is often the most cordial way to leave a relationship. How can I deal with my friend who always complains about work? You could set boundaries as to how often you talk to your friend about certain topics. It’s extremely important to consider how you might be inadvertently inviting your friend to talk more about their issues. Consider this: Do you seem interested in the topic? For example, bringing up work might give the impression that you want to hear about the topic. Do you offer your friend advice? Have you tried redirecting your friend to a different subject? Have you ever suggested that your friend speak to a professional or higher-up at work about the concerns? Is your friend aware that you find the conversations emotionally draining? If not, change the conversation to a lighter topic. How can I be a support to a friend who won’t go to therapy? You can decide how much you will listen to and how you’re able to help your friend. Choose to remain in your role as a friend, not a therapist. Let your friend know that there are specific topics you don’t feel comfortable addressing. Continue to suggest therapy to your friend, and let them know why you think they’ll benefit. Some people have deep wounds that friends cannot help them resolve. How do I explain that I can’t loan my family any more money? When you explain your boundaries, people are allowed to refute them. Just say, “No.” “I’m not able to help you.” “Perhaps, I can help you with some resources.” “I can’t help; have you explored other options?” How do I set boundaries with my son without hurting his feelings? Someone set boundaries with you, and you’re okay. Set yours, knowing that you are doing it with love. Boundaries provide structure for your child. How do I stop feeling guilty? Change the narrative from “Everything is my fault” to “I am not responsible for everything that happens.” Ridding yourself of guilt is saying you want to rid yourself of emotions. You have had to deal with all emotions, including jealousy, happiness, and guilt. The more you focus on the guilt and try to stop it, the longer it will linger. Just feel. Don’t judge what you feel.