15 Now What? Your wellness hinges on your boundaries. The first time I went to therapy was in grad school. Like most people, I showed up to therapy with issues such as relationship problems, anxiety, and work-life-balance issues. I had no clue what to call the issues in my relationships with others. All I knew was that people were always trying to make me feel bad, guilt-tripping me for setting boundaries such as “I can’t loan you money anymore,” “When you borrow my car, put gas in it,” or “I can’t babysit for you because I have class.” I was constantly frustrated and resentful because the people in my life were always asking for something and never willing to show up for me. After several sessions, my therapist gently told me to grab a copy of Boundaries: Where You End and I Begin by Anne Katherine. With the help of the therapist and the book, I started to feel better about saying no and asking for what I needed. Depending on whom I’m asking, I still sometimes feel odd when making a request. But I do it anyway, because ultimately I feel better when I have healthy boundaries in my relationships. I’d rather deal with the discomfort in the short term than resentment and frustration in the long term. In healthy relationships, it’s okay, rational, and safe to state your boundaries. It goes both ways, however. You can have them, and the other party may also have them. For example, your boss may have a boundary that you show up five minutes early to meetings, and you may have one that you don’t work on weekends. Respecting other people’s limits is a beautiful way to leverage respect for your own. When someone implements a new boundary with you, such as “I would like you to put your phone away while we’re having dinner,” the best way to respond is by affirming and upholding the request. Verbally, your response could be “I understand. I will put my phone away.” Then ensure that your phone is put away. After reading this book, you know that when someone implements a boundary, it’s to help them feel safe, happy, and secure in the relationship. These limits aren’t to be taken personally. The second (and my personal favorite) agreement from the book The Four Agreements: A Practical Guide to Personal Freedom, by Don Miguel Ruiz, is “Do not take anything personally.” So whatever happens around you, don’t take it personally. Nothing other people do is because of you. It’s because of themselves. All people live in their own dream and their own mind. Even when words seem personal, such as a direct insult, they really have nothing to do with you. I constantly work with my clients to depersonalize events and interactions with others. When we personalize, we negate the personal story and history of the other people involved. Personalizing assumes that everything is about us. I’m the sort of person, for example, who prefers that people take their shoes off in my house. I believe what we carry on our shoes shouldn’t be brought indoors, and it means less mopping for me. In the early days of my rule, several people questioned my practice. “Why do I have to take my shoes off?” But my rule isn’t about them. It certainly wasn’t a comment on their choice of footwear. The same is true of your boundaries and the people who ask you to honor theirs. Without questioning someone, you can agree to the request or suffer the consequences of not accepting it. But remember, you can’t determine your consequences. If your boundary is in direct conflict with someone else’s, it’s essential to evaluate which is healthy and will be most helpful for the relationship. Remember, rigid boundaries are not healthy. Boundaries are established in two parts: (1) verbally communicating them to others, and (2) taking action, whether implementing consequences or removing yourself from interactions with people who won’t or don’t respect your boundaries. After you’ve done all you can, the ultimate boundary might be to end an unhealthy relationship. This is an unfortunate but sometimes unavoidable circumstance. When you choose to end a relationship because it’s no longer viable, remember that you tried. In your effort to repair the relationship, you offered solutions that could have worked. It’s possible that if the situation changes, you can make up with the other person. Here are a few tips to consider when rekindling relationships: What do you expect to be different? Has the situation/person truly changed? What is the evidence that the person/situation is different? Are you well matched with the other person, or are you merely fixated on the relationship working out? If nothing has changed, are you willing to repeat what you experienced before? Hoping a relationship will improve without assessing it realistically will land you back in a similar or worse situation than before. At first, setting your boundaries may be uncomfortable. You might feel riddled with guilt. You might question if you’re doing the right thing. But set them anyway. Push past the discomfort, and do it even while you feel afraid. You’re challenging yourself to be healthier and to have healthier relationships. Ambivalence is a part of the process, and it’s perfectly natural to feel insecure while trying something new. Then, once you start setting boundaries, stay the course, because consistency is the most crucial part of the process. Remember: there is no such thing as guilt-free boundary setting. If you want to minimize (not eliminate) guilt, change the way you think about the process. Stop thinking about boundaries as mean or wrong; start to believe that they’re a nonnegotiable part of healthy relationships, as well as a self-care and wellness practice. Creating healthy boundaries is how you ensure that you’re happy and well in your relationships and in life. For them to stay implemented, be clear about them verbally and through your actions. Remember that when someone doesn’t agree with or understand your boundaries, they may push back, question, test your limits, ignore, or ghost you. No matter what, don’t stop setting them. Persevere with the awareness that your boundaries are not for people to like. They’re for you to remain healthy in your relationships. They’re a way for you to set ground rules for yourself and others. And they’re useful in all areas of life: technology, work, your relationship with yourself, and your relationships with others. So it’s okay to have boundaries and to communicate them assertively. Only with boundaries can you peacefully coexist with others. Situations, relationships, and people struggle to survive without boundaries. Here are just a few of the benefits: People with boundaries sleep better. People with boundaries experience less burnout. People with boundaries have healthier relationships that tend to last longer. People with boundaries experience less stress. People with boundaries feel more joyful. People with boundaries benefit from the short- and long-term value of setting them. Thank you so much for your willingness to be brave and to change. I promise that the journey toward healthier boundaries is worth the discomfort of setting them. Set your boundaries, knowing that you are improving your life, not harming others.