2 The Cost of Not Having Healthy Boundaries Choosing discomfort over resentment. —Brené Brown Erica thought she had to be a hard worker, a great friend, and an all-around rock-star mom—all while looking like she slept eight hours a night. She worked forty hours a week as an accountant and was the single mother of two girls, ages seven and nine. When she wasn’t at work, Erica was driving the girls around to activities. Her oldest played soccer, the youngest took dance classes, and both were active in the Girl Scouts, while also seeing tutors. Her daughters’ father provided only financial support and didn’t help much with the kids. But Erica was still determined to give her girls the best life possible. She based her perspective about motherhood on the fact that the other mothers around her seemed to be doing it all without any help. So after college, she didn’t think anything of moving eight hundred miles away from her family. This year, though, during her busy tax season, she started to unravel. The long days, nights, and expectations were becoming too much. Washing and putting the dishes away every night turned into dishes piled up in the sink. Her regular routine of washing a load of laundry per day turned into two weeks’ worth of dirty laundry. She started zoning out while scrolling through social media on her phone, which made her late everywhere. The kids ate quick meals or frozen foods, as Erica paid no attention anymore to providing a balanced diet. Erica was unintentionally on strike. At some point, she mentally said, “Screw it. How am I supposed to be a fantastic employee and mom at the same time?” She couldn’t do it all, so she did as little as possible at home and spent almost no time with friends. When the girls tried to talk to her about the changes at home, she’d deny there was a problem. Then, for a few days, she’d get back into her old high-functioning rhythm of cleaning, cooking, and taking the kids to activities. But she couldn’t stick with it, and would inevitably fall back into letting things go. Erica started therapy at the urging of her friends, who saw her becoming burned out. While she was aware that she spent hours on social media and had become more withdrawn, she questioned whether she was actually experiencing burnout. After all, everything was fine at work. But she noted that work offered her support and praise, while the expectations were reasonable. At home, she said her job was thankless, never-ending, and mundane. She had no tools to advocate for herself at home like she did at work. There was no support system where she could vent her frustrations. She felt like she could never meet the expectations of being a good mother that she’d previously tried to achieve. Erica had to create realistic expectations for her role as a mother, which meant setting healthy boundaries. When I began seeing Erica, she spoke about her fantasies of running away and leaving everything. It wasn’t that she didn’t love her kids. Obviously, she did. It was just all so exhausting. She was frustrated with not being able to depend on their father. She resented having to ask him to pick up the girls from school or practices. Erica craved a well-balanced life for her daughters, but she was frustrated to be the only person responsible for making it work. In my office, Erica told me she’d never heard her friends talk about motherhood in such a negative way. It made her feel ungrateful. And she’d always wanted to be a mom, so why wasn’t she enjoying it? “The older the girls get, the more I pull away,” she said. “At some point, I realized that motherhood would be endless.” Giving Erica the space to talk openly allowed her to be honest about the feelings she’d been avoiding. During one session, she had an aha moment when she realized her anger toward her ex-husband was being redirected toward her children. That emotional breakthrough led her to take small steps to be more focused at home. Instead of complaining about not having help, she hired a housekeeper to come in a few times a month. She asked her friends if they would be willing to watch the girls for a few hours while she spent time alone. She started giving the girls chores so that everything wouldn’t be on her. Erica started managing burnout by letting go of the need to be a rock star and instead asking for help when she needed it. What Can Happen When We Avoid Setting Boundaries Burnout Burnout is overwhelming, and boundaries are the cure. Burnout happens when people become emotionally, mentally, or physically exhausted. In many cases, like Erica’s, it leads to chronic frustration, neglect in duties, moodiness, and avoidance. An article published by the Harvard Gazette found that doctor burnout costs the health care system $4.6 billion a year. As a result, doctors make critical medical mistakes, misdiagnosing illnesses, prescribing the wrong medications, and not paying attention to essential details. According to Emily Nagoski and Amelia Nagoski, the authors of Burnout: The Secret to Unlocking the Stress Cycle, burnout is caused by stress, which they describe as “the neurological and physiological shift that happens in your body when you encounter [triggers].” Burnout is caused by Not knowing when to say no Not knowing how to say no Prioritizing others over yourself People-pleasing Superhero syndrome (“I can do it all”) Unrealistic expectations Not being appreciated for what you do Let’s go through each of these for Erica. Not Knowing When to Say No Despite knowing that her busy season at work was coming up, Erica made no preparations to do less. Instead, she wanted to continue to operate at the same pace as she had during her typical work season. She even added another activity to her kids’ schedule at her busiest time of year. Without additional support, Erica would have to Get the kids and herself ready, take them to school, work 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., pick up the girls from school, take them to activities, prepare dinner, clean the house, help with homework, get the girls ready for bed, plug back in for work, prepare for the next day, and sleep five to six hours. Then she had to start it all over the next day. Suggested Boundaries Most parents want their children to be well-rounded, but that doesn’t have to come at the expense of the parents’ sanity. Erica could check with other parents in her neighborhood to see if carpooling is an option. She could also lighten her load by saying no to anything beyond one activity per semester for her girls. Not Knowing How to Say No “No” is extremely difficult to say, especially when you want to do it all. Erica had to learn to be okay with not doing it all and also not allowing her daughters to get fixated on doing it all. Suggested Boundary Instead of saying yes to all extracurricular activities, Erica could wait a semester to see if the girls are still interested. Giving kids time helps them think through their options. The ability to try everything doesn’t allow children to become good at any one activity. Prioritizing Others Over Yourself Erica’s daily to-do list didn’t include anything for relaxing or reconnecting to herself. Work, home, and kids were the focus of her days. She was completely missing from her list. Suggested Boundary Erica could schedule time for herself every day, engaging in a quick morning routine. For example: Do a wake-up stretch (two minutes). Meditate or sit quietly (two minutes). Read something inspirational (two minutes). Write down thoughts and one thing you’re grateful for (two or three minutes). Recite a positive affirmation or intention for the day (one minute). Repeating this plan before bed would also be helpful. Sticking to a morning and evening routine would ensure that Erica had time to connect with herself daily. People-Pleasing Erica had a lot of people she wanted to please—her children, boss, and friends. She wanted to be a better mother than her mother had been to her. In trying to please everyone, however, she was left with little energy to care for herself. Suggested Boundary I suggested that Erica start asking herself “Why is this important to me?” and do only what is most important. Sometimes we do things that aren’t important to us but that we believe maintain a particular image of “good parent” or “person who has it all together.” Superhero Syndrome (I Can Do It All) No one can do it all. Believing we can leads to burnout. In Erica’s case, she saw the mom bloggers who posted gorgeous pictures of themselves holding their well-dressed babies. For a long time, she believed it was possible to do everything and still cook carefully plated meals every day. She had no perspective on the average woman’s struggle to manage work, life, and relationships, even though she was living it herself. Suggested Boundary Stop following people on social media who make it appear they have it all together all the time. Connect more with mothers who are honest about the struggles of their everyday lives, and share ways to manage stress. Unrealistic Expectations Erica had been washing a load of laundry daily, cooking dinner, working, driving her kids around, and working some more. Her expectations weren’t reasonable, realistic, or sustainable. I suggested she ask herself some questions: Whose expectations am I fulfilling? Do my kids believe I’ll say yes to every request? Does my family require one-hour recipes every night? Then she considered that perhaps her expectations were unreasonable. Realistic expectations don’t lead to stress. Suggested Boundary Erica had tasks on her plate that she didn’t have to do herself. She became willing to ask for help or hire help so that she could do less and delegate more. We can’t create more time, but we can do less, delegate, or ask for help. Not Being Appreciated for What You Do Erica’s burnout didn’t extend to work, because she received recognition for her efforts and felt valued there. This gave her the incentive to be great at her job. At home, however, Erica didn’t receive any praise for her efforts. Suggested Boundary Tell people what you need. Erica has become aware that she needs positive feedback and affirmation. Communicating this need to her family could give her the push she needs. — Here are a few additional issues that commonly lead to burnout: Things That Lead to Burnout Listening to people complain about the same things over and over Doing your best with little appreciation for your work Dispensing your advice to people who don’t value your feedback Engaging in dialogue with people who take an emotional toll on you Doing things that don’t make you happy Lacking balance (harmony) in your roles and duties Setting high expectations at work, at home, or in relationships Having a continual urge to control situations outside of your control Mental Health and Boundaries Mental health issues are not the cause of an inability to say no, be assertive, and advocate for ourselves. But this inability can certainly be exacerbated by mental health problems. For example, ruminating, which is replaying thoughts over and over in our heads, is a behavior that comes with some diagnoses. Focusing on how others might respond is one way we ruminate, which impacts our ability to act. Boundary issues are more pronounced with the following mental health problems. Anxiety When people seek therapy, it’s usually for anxiety and/or depression. According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, 40 million adult Americans have been diagnosed with anxiety and approximately 20 million with depression. Many people are diagnosed with both. First, let’s take a closer look at anxiety. It’s often triggered by setting unrealistic expectations, the inability to say no, people-pleasing, and the inability to be assertive. When people come to me with anxiety, we begin to dissect the different aspects of their lives and to work on ways to minimize the triggers that cause them to become anxious. Based on my experience with clients, the biggest trigger for anxiety is the inability to say no. So helping people with anxiety means assisting them in setting boundaries. Saying no is the most obvious way to set one. But rather than appear mean or displease someone, we often agree to things we don’t want. We may agree to do something that we don’t have time to do or that we don’t really know how to do. Then we become anxious about all the things we’ve said yes to doing with and for others. We worry about getting it all done and doing it correctly. As these worries flood our brain, we experience anxiety. So setting a limit about what we’re reasonably able (and willing) to do is one way to manage anxiety triggers. Unrealistic expectations of yourself and others can also trigger anxiety. Sometimes, expectations arise as a result of comparing yourself with others, or your expectations may come from family or cultural norms or your friends. If you deal with frequent anxiety, it’s important to become aware of what is a reasonable expectation and what isn’t. To determine if your expectations are reasonable, consider this: Whose standard am I trying to meet? Do I have the time to commit to this? What’s the worst thing that could happen if I don’t do this? How can I honor my boundaries in this situation? For people with chronic anxiety, the most challenging part of this process is the fear of what others might think. In an anxious state, people create scenarios that lead to adverse outcomes if they try to set a boundary. “If I say no, they’ll say I’m being selfish and abandon me,” for example. Even though the worst case is the least likely outcome, when you’re anxious, it’s exactly what you work hard to avoid. But the true worst-case scenario is avoiding boundaries. Saying no to others allows you to say yes to yourself or to things you truly want. Affirmations for people who struggle with anxiety: “I’m entitled to have expectations.” “In healthy relationships, my desires will be acknowledged and accepted.” “After I set limits, people will remain in a relationship with me.” “I can set standards even through my discomfort.” Now let’s take a look at how boundaries impact depression. Depression When I treat depression, I’m treating hopelessness. My work with depressed clients involves empowering them to believe in themselves. When they’re able to do that, their lives get better. One of the ways I instill hope is by helping them set simple boundaries. They come up with something small and request that another person adhere to that little request. We start with baby steps. For instance, I will say, “The next time you go out to eat and your order isn’t prepared correctly, make a promise to yourself to ask for it to be corrected.” Starting with a less daunting boundary with a stranger may seem trivial, but when people suffer from depression, they often find it hard to advocate for themselves in any situation. When this assignment is executed, my clients with depression can see how a request can be honored. From there, we start to work on more challenging requests. Examples of Less Harmful Boundaries Accepting assistance to your car at the grocery store Correcting people when they say your name wrong Asking for help while shopping instead of trying to find merchandise on your own Asking questions instead of assuming you know the answer If you experience depression, it can be helpful to set boundaries about how many things you expect yourself to do in a single day. If you add too much to your to-do list but lack the motivation, you’ll set yourself up for failure. Depression will increase if you take on too much without finishing any of the tasks you started. Instead, highlight the small wins, such as showering over the weekend, going to the gym, or going out with friends. Affirmations for people who struggle with depression: “Little by little, I can keep small promises to myself.” “Small wins are big wins.” “Doing one thing is better than doing nothing at all.” Dependent Personality Disorder (DPD) DPD is characterized by the inability to be alone. A person with DPD feels helpless without the assistance of another person, leaving no room for boundaries in relationships. People with DPD continuously seek attention, advice, and comfort from others. Their reliance on others for decision-making and constant feedback often damages the relationships of people with DPD. Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) People who experience BPD have unhealthy attachments in their relationships with others. Their relationships are usually unstable because they overpersonalize their interactions with others, making assumptions and overreacting. Those with BPD often lack boundaries, as they find it hard to differentiate where they begin and others end. The separation between them and other people is blurred. — Additionally, people struggling with substance use, psychotic disorders, and eating issues are likely to experience problems with boundaries. Let’s take a look at how these issues present in our relationships with ourselves and others. What Relationships Without Boundaries Look Like Carlos considered himself a good friend. When his roommate asked to borrow his car, he immediately said yes. He didn’t ask any questions and trusted his roommate would do right by him. When his roommate returned, however, Carlos immediately smelled cigarette smoke in the car and saw that the tank was nearly out of gas. “What kind of person smokes in another person’s car and leaves the tank almost empty?” he thought. He was disappointed to find that his roommate failed to meet his unspoken expectations. Communicating our boundaries isn’t easy, but without it, we set ourselves up for long-term suffering. We simply can’t have a healthy relationship with another person without communicating what’s acceptable and unacceptable to us. If we aren’t proactive about this in our relationships, we can be sure the other person will set their boundaries. That forces us to operate by their rules and their rules only. Boundaries are not unspoken rules. In Chapter 6, I will show you how to communicate boundaries clearly, but know that if you haven’t told someone what yours are, they can’t possibly know. People can’t meet a standard that we never express. Boundaries are not unspoken rules. Unspoken boundaries are invisible, and they often sound like “They should’ve known better” or “Common sense would say...” Common sense is based on our own life experiences, however, and it isn’t the same for everyone. That’s why it’s essential to communicate and not assume that people are aware of our expectations in relationships. We must inform others of our limits and take responsibility for upholding them. Relationships that have the potential to be healthy often become unhealthy because of either rigid or porous boundaries. Either we are strict about them, or we give people free rein with no limits. These scenarios create one-sided relationships, in which one person does most of the work to keep the relationship going. But healthy relationships are between two people who are mutually supportive of each other. (The only occasion when one-sided relationships are appropriate is in the parent-child dynamic.) Simply put, relationships without boundaries are dysfunctional, unreasonable, and hard to manage. They operate mostly based on the assumption that something “magical” will happen to turn it all around. But hoping that our relationships will repair themselves out of nowhere is a long shot at best. Without boundaries in relationships, we also can’t have healthy self-care practices. In fact, most people without healthy limits think that engaging in self-care is selfish, so it feels terrible when they try to do it. They believe that their self-care is at the expense of being there for another person. Self-care brings up feelings of guilt, because they feel like others will fall apart without their help. In these kinds of relationships, our role is that of a helper. We worry about the other person and don’t trust that they can care for themselves unless we enable them. Our attention is multifocused because we are continually trying to balance the needs of multiple people with our own needs. Even when we try to focus on ourselves, we tend to still focus on others and base our decisions on what these other people might think. Without boundaries, relationships usually end, or we become fed up from being mistreated. Sometimes we allow mistreatment for so long that we can’t take it anymore. Then, since we never clearly communicated our unhappiness, the other person is shocked to find out how much we suffered. When we do become clear about our expectations, saying “I need you to ____,” we at least learn exactly who is and isn’t willing to honor what we need and want. In your relationships, are people clear about how you desire to be treated? How are you treating yourself? Others learn a lot about you from watching how you treat yourself. People can sense your lack of self-esteem or neediness based on how you talk to yourself, talk about yourself, and treat yourself behaviorally. Be kind to yourself, because the people in your life are watching. This doesn’t mean that people have a right to be mean. Common Feelings When We Don’t Set Boundaries When you say yes but want to say no, you feel something “off” in your body. When you allow people to take advantage of you, you feel something in your body that isn’t right. When you give to others begrudgingly, you feel it in your body. So if you learn to pay attention to your body, it will tell you when it’s time to set boundaries—in the sigh before you answer your phone, the desire to avoid certain people, or your hesitance to say yes. You might also feel a tightness in your belly, an ache in your shoulder, or a pain in your neck or temple. As you become more aware of your personal signs, you’ll discover how often you put your own needs aside to please or take care of others. The emotions that people most commonly feel when they don’t set boundaries are resentment, anger, and frustration. Here are a few common causes of these emotions in relationships: Feeling unheard Setting a boundary but not gaining the result you desired Committing to things you don’t want to do Feeling used Avoiding setting boundaries Let’s break down each of these emotions in a bit more detail. Resentment At its core, resentment is disappointment. Then you mix in anger and fear. Because resentment is often an uncomfortable emotion to admit and express, many people deny feeling it. So they often express it in a passive-aggressive way. Instead of acknowledging “I’m feeling resentful,” they hint at the feeling through terse and evasive conversation. Or they avoid time with the offending person or dismiss the impact of the offensive behavior. Instead, they assume the other person should just figure out why they’re upset. Anger Anger is a feeling of hostility or annoyance, and it can be expressed inwardly or outwardly. When expressed inwardly, people with unhealthy boundaries engage in negative self-talk, self-sabotage, self-blaming, or low self-esteem. Instead of holding others accountable, the anger becomes an issue within. This often causes anxiety, depression, or other mental health issues. Anger toward others looks like blaming without personal accountability, adult tantrums (yelling, cursing, rage, crying fits, breaking things, verbal abuse), or an overall apathetic disposition toward others. Both inwardly and outwardly expressed anger can negatively impact relationships. Frustration Frustration ensues when we’re unable to achieve a goal or get a need met—when we try something and feel that we failed. For example, let’s say you work up the courage to set a boundary and communicate it to another person, only to find that they don’t honor it. This is sure to cause frustration. When we feel frustrated after making our expectations known, we say things like “Well, they won’t listen anyway” or “I already tried that, and it didn’t work.” Frustration leads to a loss of hope and motivation. But feeling frustrated isn’t a reason to stop trying to implement boundaries. Setting them takes perseverance. There are so many reasons why setting them might not have worked. Here are a few: The other person wasn’t ready to hear you. What you said was misunderstood because you didn’t follow through with the boundary you set. You failed to honor the boundaries you set up, so people couldn’t understand that you were serious. You made a request but didn’t set a boundary. Whatever the reason, you can try again. Don’t allow frustration to hold you back from getting your needs met. Things We Do to Avoid Setting Boundaries Move Away “I just moved away so they would stop asking me to do things.” I’ve heard this several times from clients in my office. It may seem like an easy fix to blame the other person and leave their physical proximity, but you will almost certainly find yourself creating new relationships with the same boundary issues. Besides, technology has made it easier for us to be tempted to offer long-distance support emotionally and financially. We can call, talk, and text without huge costs, and depending on where we move, the other person might be able to quickly visit. Distance doesn’t always solve the problem, so a physical shift is simply not the answer. It’s a mental change that’s required. And then we change our behaviors to align with what we say we need. The truth is that unhealthy boundaries will follow you wherever you go unless you learn to verbalize them. Gossip Here’s the definition of “gossip”: Talking about people in a judgmental manner with the intent to cause harm Making statements behind the back of the person being discussed Instead of setting a direct boundary, we often use gossip as a way of processing our frustrations. But gossip isn’t helpful and only leads to more resentment. It does nothing to improve the relationship or end the behavior that bothers us. Complaints Complaining to others won’t fix our unhealthy boundaries. Similar to gossiping, complaining is another way of processing frustration. However, with complaining, we usually play the role of victim, saying things like “Why does everyone expect so much from me? My husband knows I need help, but he doesn’t offer. I don’t understand why people can’t do things for themselves.” Along with not being a solution, complaining—much like gossiping—builds resentment. As we air our grievances, we become more frustrated and annoyed, reinforcing the belief that others are doing things to us. We don’t stop to evaluate what we’re allowing to happen by not setting clear boundaries. Avoidance When I bought a new car, I didn’t want to tell people they couldn’t borrow it. I thought making it difficult for them would end the issues with borrowing. But then they started asking me to drive them places. By not creating a boundary, I created a new problem. There’s nothing easy about these tough conversations. We don’t want to hurt anyone’s feelings, so we allow issues to fester. Then we inevitably become resentful, angry, or frustrated. We hope that eventually people will figure out what our avoidant behavior means and change of their own accord. For example, while in college I lost interest in a guy I was dating. As he continued to call, I rarely answered, thinking he’d eventually get the point and stop calling. When I did answer, I used excuses like “Between work and school, I don’t have time to hang out” and “I have homework.” The truth was, I simply didn’t like him. After a few weeks, I couldn’t take it anymore. When he called, I said, “I don’t like you in the same way you like me. I think you should stop calling.” Guess what? Just like that, he stopped calling. I was no longer annoyed every time my phone rang, and he was free to call someone who was really interested in him. Everyone was happy. Avoidance wasn’t an effective strategy for me, and it isn’t for you either. In the gentlest way possible, say “No, thanks, that doesn’t work for me; I’m not interested.” Or, “No, you can’t borrow my car.” Don’t waste your time and anyone else’s time hoping they will figure it out. Cutoff A cutoff is when you abruptly (sometimes without explanation) disconnect from another person. Before you cut people off, ask yourself this: Was the other person aware of my issues with the relationship? Have I tried setting a boundary? Did I uphold my boundary and hold the other person accountable? Cutoffs happen as a result of believing that the other person is incapable of change, that they won’t honor our boundary, or that we have let things go so far that we’re no longer interested in repairing the relationship. Cutting people off may seem like an easy way to resolve relationship issues, but we can’t escape setting limits if we want healthy relationships. Exercise This chapter began with Erica’s story about burnout. During a retreat, I learned an activity that I’ve shared with my clients, many of whom found it helpful. The “ What’s on Your Plate?” exercise is a constructive way to identify what you already have on your plate before committing to more. On a separate sheet of paper, write down all of the duties, activities, and responsibilities attached to your various roles in life. Use the key below, and put a symbol next to each item. (Some may require more than one symbol.) Enjoy More time Most time Energizes For You For Others After you’ve completed the activity, ask yourself: Are you surprised by anything on your list? What’s missing from your list? What do you have to eliminate to spend more time on the things you enjoy? In the next chapter, we’ll discuss why we tolerate boundary issues, why it’s so hard to set limits, and how childhood trauma and neglect make this process uniquely challenging for us.