4 The Six Types of Boundaries It is necessary, and even vital, to set standards, for your life and the people you allow in it. —Mandy Hale Alex was known as “the needy one.” Within ten minutes of meeting her, she would tell you her life story. She’d invite you into her life, and she expected you to do the same. When people didn’t reciprocate, she thought it meant there was something wrong with them. In her attempt to connect, she quickly attached herself to others. Eventually, a close friend told Alex that she needed space from their friendship, and another friend confirmed that Alex was an “over-sharer” and “needy.” That’s when Alex came to me looking for answers. In addition to answering the written questions I always ask at the initial appointment, Alex wrote a few extra points about herself. Then she spoke fast as she tried to rush through all the details of her life. At the end of our session, I asked, “Why did you give me additional notes outside the questions I asked?” “I wanted you to know all about me,” she said. Over the next few sessions, I learned that Alex believed the key to connection was knowing everything about someone. Nevertheless, she discussed events and details without much depth or reflection about her feelings. Over time, I found out why. “My dad told me everything,” she said after a few sessions. He even told Alex the details of her mother’s affair. His model was “We don’t keep secrets.” Yet when Alex tried to share with her father, he immediately told her how to think instead of allowing her to talk. She consistently asked him for input on her decisions because she didn’t trust herself to make the “right” choices without his opinion. But he tended to be critical and dismissive of her feelings. Alex’s friends were overwhelmed by her constant need for connection and feedback about her life. Slowly, they began distancing themselves. Alex had no clue that she was violating other people’s boundaries. To her, relationships meant closeness, and to be close, you had to talk often, disclose everything, and rely on others for validation. Although this was normal in her relationship with her parents, it didn’t work long-term with her peers. So our work together consisted of helping Alex identify her feelings, allow herself to make mistakes, and improve her self-esteem about her ability to make healthy decisions for herself. She had to learn how to relay the details of her life appropriately and at a reasonable pace. In this chapter, we’ll talk about the six areas of boundaries: physical, sexual, intellectual, emotional, material, and time. Physical Boundaries Personal space and physical touch are your physical boundaries. Your physical space is the perimeter around your body. We all have a certain level of awareness of our bodies and what feels comfortable to us, and everyone’s needs in terms of physical space are different. People also have different views as to what physical touch is appropriate. These boundaries vary due to the setting, the relationship we have with the other person, and our comfort level. But we can tell people our preferences about personal space and physical touch. Examples of Physical Boundary Violations Physical abuse Forcing hugs, kisses, or handshakes Standing too close Holding someone’s hand in public when they’ve made it clear they’re uncomfortable with public displays of affection Touching someone on their body in a way they deem inappropriate Reading someone’s journal or another form of invasion of privacy Setting a physical boundary sounds like this: “I’m more of a handshaker; I don’t want to hug.” “Please move back a little.” “I’m not comfortable with public displays of affection/PDAs. I’d prefer it if we saved this until we got home.” “I’ve asked you not to rub my back. It makes me feel uncomfortable.” “These are my private writings. Please don’t look at them, because it’s a violation of my privacy.” Here are a few ways to honor your physical boundaries: Verbalize your need for physical distance to others. Be clear with others about your discomfort with certain types of physical touch, such as hugging. Bear in mind, however, that your boundaries are constantly changing. As your needs in life change, your expectations in your relationships will shift as well. So if you experience discomfort after an interaction with someone, it might be a sign that you need to set a physical limit. Let’s say you’ve allowed someone you know to hug you in the past, but you suddenly find yourself feeling uncomfortable when hugged by this person. You have every right to tell them you no longer want to hug. Sexual Boundaries It’s never okay to touch anyone’s body without consent, and children can never consent to sexual acts. Touching, making sexual comments, or engaging in sexual acts without expressed consent is a violation of sexual boundaries. It’s never acceptable for children to be placed in any sexual situation, even a sexual discussion in their presence. Since children can’t communicate sexual limits, adults must adhere to appropriate behavior with children. Unlike other boundaries that need to be spoken to be understood, many sexual ones are unspoken because they are the rules of society. These include rape, assault, and molestation. Examples of Sexual Boundary Violations Sexual abuse, assault, or molestation Comments about someone’s sexual appearance Touching in a sexually suggestive manner Sexual innuendos Sexual jokes Setting a sexual boundary sounds like this: “Your comments about my appearance make me feel uncomfortable.” “I’m not interested in a sexual relationship with you.” “Move your hand off my leg.” “Stop.” “Your comment isn’t funny; it’s sexually inappropriate.” Here are a few ways to honor your sexual boundaries: Report sexual misconduct that you experienced or witnessed. Don’t make excuses for poor conduct. Intellectual Boundaries Intellectual boundaries refer to your thoughts and ideas. You’re free to have an opinion about anything you want. And when you express your opinion, your words shouldn’t be dismissed, belittled, or ridiculed. However, staying mindful of what topics are appropriate versus inappropriate in a specific situation is another way of respecting intellectual boundaries. When Alex was young, her father told her that her mother had an affair. Although the information was truthful, it wasn’t appropriate for Alex to know this at a young age. When a parent has an inappropriate conversation like this with a child, it’s an intellectual boundary violation. Examples of Intellectual Boundary Violations Calling someone names for their beliefs or opinions Yelling during disagreements Ridiculing someone for their views and thoughts Dismissing someone because of disagreements Demeaning a child’s mother/father in front of a child Telling children about problems they aren’t emotionally capable of handling Setting an intellectual boundary sounds like this: “You can disagree without being mean or rude.” “I don’t think this is an appropriate conversation to have with a child.” “I won’t talk to you if you keep raising your voice.” “That was a mean joke; I’m offended.” “I just said something, and you dismissed me. Why?” Here are a few ways to honor your intellectual boundaries: If you’re a parent, refrain from discussing adult matters with your kids. Be respectful of people who are different from you. Emotional Boundaries When you share your feelings, it’s reasonable to expect others to support you. For some of us, however, expressing emotions isn’t easy. So when someone belittles your emotions or invalidates your feelings, they are violating your emotional boundaries. This can make you feel uncomfortable the next time you want to express your emotions. Alex tried to tell her father how she felt, but he repeatedly dismissed her or told her how to feel. Eventually, she stopped sharing with him at all and began to distrust her own emotions. She wondered, “Is it right to feel sad about this?” Seeking validation, she asked her friends if what she felt was okay. Because her emotional boundaries had been violated, Alex was handicapped by the opinions of others. She didn’t trust herself without feedback from other people. With healthy emotional boundaries, you express your feelings and personal information to others gradually, not all at once. This also means you share only when it’s appropriate, and you choose your confidants carefully. In an Instagram poll, I asked, “Have you ever shared a friend’s secret with someone else?” Seventy-two percent said, “Yes, I’ve shared a secret.” I received several DMs explaining why the secrets were shared. Here are a few reasons: The secret was too burdensome. There was a safety concern. “I can’t keep a secret.” “I tell my partner everything.” Examples of Emotional Boundary Violations Sharing too much too soon (oversharing) Sharing inappropriate emotional information with children Emotional dumping/excessive venting Pushing someone to share information they aren’t comfortable sharing Invalidating someone’s feelings Telling people how to feel, such as “You shouldn’t be sad about that” Minimizing the impact of something, such as “That wasn’t a big deal” Pushing people to move past complicated feelings swiftly Gossiping about the personal details of another person’s life Setting an emotional boundary sounds like this: “When I share things with you, I expect you to keep them confidential.” “I feel uncomfortable sharing my feelings. I would feel better if you acknowledged what I’m saying with a nod.” “I hear that you have a lot of things going on. I don’t feel equipped to help you. Have you considered talking to a therapist?” “I don’t feel comfortable talking about that topic.” “It isn’t okay for you to tell me how I should feel. My feelings are valid.” “I will take my time processing my feelings. Don’t rush me to move on.” “It’s okay for me to feel how I feel in any situation.” Here are a few ways to honor your emotional boundaries: Ask people if they want you to just listen, or if they’re looking for feedback. This will help you determine whether or not to offer suggestions. Share only with people you trust who can indeed hold space for your emotions. Material Boundaries Material boundaries have to do with your possessions. Your stuff is your stuff. If you decide to share your stuff, it’s your choice. You also have the right to determine how others treat your possessions. If you loan a friend a tool in good condition, it’s appropriate to expect the tool to be returned in the same shape. When people give you something back in worse condition, they’ve violated your material boundaries. Examples of Material Boundary Violations Using things longer than the agreed-on time frame Never returning a borrowed item Loaning borrowed items to others without permission Damaging a possession and refusing to pay for it Returning possessions in poor condition Setting a material boundary sounds like this: “I will loan you money, but I expect the full amount back by Friday.” “I can’t loan you my car this weekend.” “Be sure to return my tool in good condition.” “I can’t loan you any money.” “You can borrow my suit, but if you stain it, you’ll have to pay for dry cleaning.” Here are a few ways to honor your material boundaries: Do not loan things to people who’ve demonstrated that they will not respect your possessions. Share your expectations for your possessions up front. Time Boundaries In my experience, of the six areas listed, time is the boundary area that people tend to struggle with the most. Time boundaries consist of how you manage your time, how you allow others to use your time, how you deal with favor requests, and how you structure your free time. People with these issues struggle with work-life balance, self-care, and prioritizing their needs. Giving up your time to others is one significant way that you might violate your time boundaries. If you don’t have time for something that you want to do, you don’t have healthy boundaries with time. Examples of How We Violate Time Boundaries and How They Are Violated by Others Calling multiple times in a row for non-emergencies Expecting someone to drop everything in order to provide help Calling or sending text messages late when the recipient is sleeping Asking others to do things for free Overcommitting Having long conversations with emotionally draining people Requesting favors at a time when it’s clear the other person isn’t available Asking someone to stay late at work for no additional pay Accepting favor requests from people who won’t reciprocate Setting a time boundary sounds like this: “I’m unable to stay late today.” “I work from nine o’clock to five o’clock, so I’m not available to chat throughout the day.” “I can’t help you this weekend.” “I can help you with your taxes, but my fee is seventy-five dollars.” “I won’t be able to make it to your event on Tuesday.” Here are a few ways to honor your time boundaries: Before you say yes to a request, check your calendar to make sure you’re not overcommitting. Don’t try to squeeze in another event or task, or you’ll be upset about doing so. When you’re busy, allow calls to go to voicemail and texts or emails to go unread until it’s convenient for you to respond. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. When boundaries are violated, it’s critical to have a conversation about what happened and how you felt about it. Because we can’t control others, we must focus on what we will say or what actions we can take if the violation is repeated. Below you will find examples of each type of boundary. Read the scenario and consider what you would do or say for each. Physical boundary example: Your coworker enters your cubicle while you’re busy completing a task. When you don’t respond, your coworker persists by leaning over you at your desk. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Sexual boundary example: Your friend’s husband makes comments about his sexual prowess. He then begins texting you provocative innuendos, which makes you feel uncomfortable. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Intellectual boundary example: You just ended a ten-year-long friendship. You’re sharing your sadness about it with your partner, who says, “You have other friends. Get over it.” Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Emotional boundary example: You tell your friend a secret, and your friend shares it with one of her friends. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Material boundary example: A friend asks to borrow your shirt. The last time you loaned them a shirt, they returned it with a hole in it. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Time boundary example: You’re under a critical deadline at work. One of your team members asks you for help on one of their projects. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario.