10 Family Tough love is you creating and keeping healthy boundaries. James was tired of being in the middle of disputes between his mother, Debra, and his wife, Tiffany. All he wanted was for the two of them to get along. Tiffany was always complaining about his mother, and his mother was always complaining to him about how she felt hurt by Tiffany. James tried to manage both of them by listening but not picking a side. Tiffany hated that James wouldn’t put his mother in her place. He allowed his mother to act like a partner in their marriage. Every decision the couple made was run past Debra first. James did a horrible job of hiding the fact that his mother’s advice persuaded his opinion. He adored her, and from his point of view, Debra was smart, successful, reliable, and offered great advice. Tiffany, on the other hand, saw Debra as manipulative, overbearing, and passive-aggressive. Tiffany had always dreamed of having a mother-in-law who would be like a second mother to her. But from the first moment she met Debra, seven months into dating James, Debra made it clear that she was the leading lady in her son’s life. James looked to his mother to help pay for their wedding and the down payment on their house, and he asked for her input on many big and small financial decisions. In their five years of marriage and two years of dating, Tiffany tried to deal with Debra by asking James to handle it, but he never put his foot down. His mother always got whatever she wanted. Tiffany was starting to resent her husband for not standing up to his mom. As a result of that resentment, she began to withdraw, missing family events and retreating to her room when Debra dropped by. Now that James and Tiffany were thinking of starting a family, she wanted her husband to finally begin setting boundaries with his mother. Eventually, Tiffany and James decided to seek therapy to discuss how Debra was impacting their marriage. The first few sessions were intense, as Tiffany presented issues from the past with Debra, and James defended his mother’s honor. At the third session, I made the declaration, “Perhaps we should focus on just the needs of the two people present.” That declaration helped us most of the time, but occasionally Debra still entered the room as a third but invisible force. When this happened, I encouraged James and Tiffany to consider the impact of a person who was not physically present but always emotionally present in the marriage. They noted that most of their disputes were due to Debra, not to anything they were doing directly to each other. In our time together, we spoke about the importance of maintaining the integrity of the relationship by not oversharing with others. The couple created boundaries around what topics they’d like to keep between themselves, when they’d like to share certain information with others, and how they would talk about their marriage to other people. At first, this was hard for James, because he was used to sharing everything with his mother. In the beginning, he gave in to Debra as she demanded more information in order to push her agenda. She seemed to know exactly what to say to get James to comply. After a few slip-ups, he started to prepare himself for his mother’s tactics. Over time, he became firm in his expectations. While James was learning to implement boundaries consistently, I worked with Tiffany on using motivating language to support her husband as he shifted his relationship with his mother. He struggled with establishing himself as an adult with Debra. She had drilled into him that she knew best and wanted the best for him, and he feared that setting boundaries would push her away. He hadn’t considered that he could set them with his mother while maintaining their closeness and simultaneously alleviating the issues in his marriage and the wedge between Tiffany and Debra. His mother wanted the best for James, but perhaps the best for him was having boundaries with her. You Become an Adult When You Set Boundaries with Your Parents Adult children are adults over the age of eighteen. Even if you live with your parents after that, you’re legally an adult, and their access to your life shifts. You may, of course, have to adhere to your parents’ boundaries if you’re living in their household, but you can still set some of your own, even if on a smaller scale. An essential part of becoming an adult is becoming your own guide. As you feel more comfortable being an adult, you start to lean further away from being ruled by your parents. In some cases, your parents might suggest that setting boundaries is disrespectful. But it isn’t disrespectful when done with care. If you’re afraid of disrespecting your parents, you might feel better sharing why the boundary is important to you. How do you stand up to the most influential force in your life? How do you change your relationship from that of a child to that of an adult child? For your entire life, your parents have been acquainted with you inside and out. They know what to say to trigger you and get what they want. You may understand what your parents desire merely by reading their body language or noticing a shift in their mood. Most people don’t want to disappoint their parents. When I was a kid, the worst thing I ever heard from my mother was “I’m disappointed.” That statement broke my heart and ensured that I would behave for at least the next two hours. Yet when you don’t set boundaries with your parents, you are the one who becomes disappointed, resentful, and anxious. At some point, it’s healthy for all adults to ask themselves, “What do I want?” Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Parents Your parents are aware of intimate details of your relationship (particularly if they’re causing harm in the relationship). Your parents are involved with disputes you have with others. Your parents don’t respect your opinion. Your parents enter your personal space without asking. Your parents insist that you say yes to everything. You say yes to your parents out of obligation even when it’s inconvenient. Boundaries with your parents look like Expressing your feelings openly Managing your time in a way that works best for your schedule and lifestyle Not pressing yourself to attend every family event Giving them rules about your home Not allowing them to show up at your home unannounced Withholding intimate details of your relationship Not painting your partner in a negative light to your parents Saying no Introducing your partner to your parents when you’re ready Handling your own disputes with others Sharing your opinion with your parents Being transparent with your parents about your expectations of how they can engage with your partner Saying no to gifts that are given with the hope of specific behavior from you Telling your parents that you don’t want to be asked about your dating life, having kids, getting married, or any other topic that makes you feel uncomfortable Staying in a hotel instead of staying with family when you visit them Boundaries with your parents sound like “I’m dating someone new. When you meet them, don’t ask them when and if we’re getting married.” “I won’t be home for Christmas because I’ve decided to celebrate with my friends.” “Before you stop by to visit, I’d like you to call.” “I’d like to express my feelings without being told that certain emotions aren’t okay.” “I know that you mean well and want the best for me, but I need to handle things in my relationship without your input.” “I won’t accept money from you if it comes with the intention that I do something to earn that money or that you will talk about my borrowing money.” “I understand how important it is to you that I remain connected to my family, but I need to have my own ideas about how to maintain connections without your input.” “When I have issues with my sister, I don’t want you to get in the middle by referring to the dispute. We are adults and can resolve our differences without your guidance.” “It makes me feel uncomfortable to hear you talk about your relationship with Mom. Please find someone else to confide in.” “I’m vegetarian, and I’d like you to keep that in mind when you prepare meals for family gatherings.” Important Reminders It’s normal and healthy for you to have boundaries in your relationships with people. (Remember that your parents are people.) Share your boundaries as soon as you notice that you need them. Doing so will prevent unwanted reactions that may occur after you’ve let things go on for too long. Setting them with your parents is new for them and for you. If there is resistance, they’re likely just adjusting to this new phase in your relationship. Be clear and consistent when you execute your boundaries. It’s true that you will always be your parents’ child. However, you evolve into an adult with your own way of existing in the world. Boundaries Around the Holidays At some point in your adult life, you may decide to change your holiday traditions. Perhaps you want to celebrate at home alone, travel, or celebrate with your partner’s family, etc. To establish your plans for how you want to celebrate the holiday, start early. Waiting until the last minute by putting it off may feel better to you, but letting your family know at the last minute that you’re veering from the original plans might cause more issues in the family. Boundaries around the holidays may look like Asking your family to stay in a hotel Staying in a hotel when you visit your family Taking some space and time to be alone if you’re staying with family Creating new traditions Buying fewer gifts or sticking to a budget Not including people who make your holiday experience uncomfortable Changing the subject when heated topics are mentioned Boundaries with Your In-Laws If you’re in a committed relationship (with or without children), it isn’t uncommon for in-laws to cause stress between you and your partner. I mentioned to a client once that my mother-in-law was coming to visit, and my client asked, “Do you like her?” Of all the in-law relationships, mothers-in-law are notorious for being relationship disruptors. In-laws disrupt the relationship when the adult child hasn’t set boundaries with their parents. As a result, spouses are often left carrying the load of setting limits. The questions I’m asked most is “How do you set boundaries with someone else’s parents?” In the book Babyproofing Your Marriage: How to Laugh More and Argue Less as Your Family Grows, authors Stacie Cockrell, Cathy O’Neill, and Julia Stone advocate for sharing your issues with your partner, mutually deciding on a course of action, and allowing your partner to execute the boundaries. Essentially, you set boundaries with your family, and your partner sets boundaries with their family. This option works well if your partner agrees with the issues you present and feels brave in doing so with their family. If your partner hasn’t established an adult child role with their parents, you may be the person left setting the limits. If you don’t set them with your in-laws, however, you may start to resent your spouse for not standing up for your relationship or for being a pushover. Speaking to your in-laws about boundaries should be done only once you’ve given your partner the chance to speak on your behalf. Be kind and gentle here. Setting boundaries is tough work, and setting them with family is the hardest area for many. Your partner is struggling with something that’s more than likely very difficult and scary. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your In-Laws They make your special family events (such as a wedding) about them. They gossip about you to their family members. They don’t like you and have told you as much. They openly share their negative views of you with your children. They question your parenting style. They make decisions for your family. They encourage your spouse or kids to keep secrets from you. They hear essential things happening with your partner before you hear about it. They give you gifts with strings attached. They give your kids things they know you wouldn’t want them to have. They don’t respect the way you parent your kids. Boundaries with your in-laws look like Clearly stating your parenting philosophy Asking your spouse to support you in a boundary you set with your in-laws Directly asking your partner to implement a boundary with their parent Not accepting gifts if you know expectations are attached Being transparent with your partner and children that it isn’t okay to keep secrets Boundaries with your in-laws sound like To In-Law “We want our children to speak openly with us. Do not advise them to keep secrets from us.” “I know that you care about our family, and I understand that you want to be involved. But it’s important for us to figure out how to navigate on our own.” “We’re grateful that you’re willing to help us financially. When you do so, please do it from the kindness of your heart, not with the expectation that we have to do something in return.” “The way you parented seems different from what we’re doing with our children. We ask that you respect the way we raise our kids by adhering to our wishes for them.” To Partner “I know you’re close to your father, but don’t discuss the personal details of our sex life with him.” “When you share things with your parents first, it makes me feel left out. I would like to be the first to know what’s happening with you.” “It isn’t okay for you to keep things from me and share them with your parents.” “When I set a boundary with your parents, I’d like you to support me.” Important Reminders Be gentle with your partner as they learn to set boundaries with their parents. It’s okay to share your boundary with your in-law if your partner doesn’t do so. Don’t allow boundary violations to go on too long without intervening. Boundaries with Other Family Members “My sister hates all my friends. Whenever I invite her anywhere with my friends, she finds a reason to have an issue with them. It’s been this way since we went away to separate colleges. It’s almost like she wants to be my only person.” Monica was tired of trying to include her sister in plans only to have her sister ruin the moment. At her twenty-third birthday party, her sister had an argument with Monica’s college roommate. Afterward, she spent most of her time at the party trying to console her sister. Much like your parents, your other family members know how to push your buttons. Whether it’s your siblings, cousins, aunts, uncles, or grandparents, they may want a prominent role in your life. It’s okay for them to have a part, but you have to guide them on how you want them to show up. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Other Family Members They use guilt trips as a way to get you to do what they want. They share personal stories that cause you to feel embarrassed. They are involved in whom you choose to date. They have no filter in the opinions they share about you. They gossip to you about other family members. They share your personal business with other family members. They push you to live a lifestyle unlike the one you want to live. You have codependent relationships with them. Your relationships are enmeshed. Boundaries with your other family members look like Allowing personal distance Attending family events because you want to, not because you’re pressured to Not allowing family members to comment on your dating status, weight, or any area of your life that you aren’t comfortable discussing Identifying what you want in your relationships with family Creating an experience that may be different from the family norm Boundaries with your other family members sound like “We aren’t as close as we used to be, and I see that it’s impacting our relationship. I will not invite you to go out with my friends if you act jealous and make the night about you.” “We don’t agree on politics. We should stop discussing politics at family gatherings.” “I know you’re concerned that I’m happy in my relationships. However, I don’t want you giving me dating advice or asking me about my dating life.” “I’m very concerned about [insert family member’s name], but I will not enable them by helping pay their bills again.” “I don’t want to be in the middle of family disputes. I will no longer be the mediator.” Important Reminders You may be the first in your family to set boundaries; remember that doing something different may elicit an unwelcome response. Setting boundaries will shift how other people see you. Boundaries with Co-Parents “How can I survive the rest of my kids’ lives with my narcissistic ex?” Jason asked me one day during a session. He shared two children with Jessica, who talked negatively about him to the kids. She also left discipline up to Jason, thereby making him appear to be the bad guy. He watched her manipulate the children by telling them how she wished she could have them more of the time, even though she’d been adamant about fifty-fifty custody. Jason began to find it harder and harder to communicate with Jessica because she repeatedly told him that he was the one at fault for the divorce’s impact on the children. The term “co-parent” applies to coupled or uncoupled parents. Even when couples are married or separated but mostly amicable, it can be challenging to raise children with two different sets of beliefs as to how to go about it. Parents may unknowingly affect their kids negatively by having a contentious relationship with each other. But when we have children with someone, we’re forever connected to them. I know it’s hard to co-parent with an ex who is difficult, but it’s more comfortable when healthy boundaries are in place. Signs That You Need Healthier Boundaries with Your Co-Parent: They talk about you to your children in a negative way. Decisions negatively impact the child because you and the other parent can’t agree. Children witness name-calling, verbal disputes, emotional abuse, or domestic violence. Children are made to pick a side (choose who’s right or wrong or the parent they’d like to be closest to). Children are used as pawns in disputes. Boundaries with co-parents look like Discussing issues together before talking to the kids Honoring a custody agreement if one is in place Not sharing inappropriate information with children about the other parent Creating rules about how to argue in front of the children Using a mediator if issues can’t be resolved amicably Assigning a pick-up and drop-off location when sending children to the other parent’s home Boundaries with co-parents sound like “While we don’t see eye to eye on this, I wonder what might be a reasonable compromise.” “I think it’s best if a mediator helps us decide what’s fair in terms of custody and child support.” “Our kids shouldn’t see us fighting. I won’t have an inappropriate conversation in front of them.” “Please don’t speak about me and what you think of me in front of the kids.” “The children are impacted by what they see. Let’s show them how to be in healthy relationships even when we disagree with someone.” Important Reminders Through observing your relationship, you are teaching your kids how to exist in their own relationships. Children want to feel safe. You can only do your part. If you set a boundary, you must honor it. Kids greatly benefit from parents getting along. Boundaries with Your Children Children under the age of eighteen aren’t emotionally capable of handling adult problems. Even when they’re mature for their age, it isn’t appropriate to share adult stressors with them. Of course, as they get older, they’re capable of handling more, along with explanations to help them understand more adult concepts. Having boundaries helps children feel safer. Despite their opposition, they benefit from rules and structure, and limits are essential to teach them how to treat others and have healthy relationships. I will use the term “age-appropriate” several times to describe a boundary’s appropriateness for different age groups. When my clients are unsure about what’s age-appropriate, I ask them to look beyond what they were exposed to as children. It could be that their own experiences were inappropriate for their age. Instead, I request that they consider TV ratings, age suggestions for specific toys, and what a doctor might say about kids safely engaging in certain things. These suggestions shouldn’t be taken as hard rules, but it helps to strongly consider why they might be in place for a particular age group. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Children They have no rules. Your parenting style is permissive. Your children are used as confidants. Your parenting style is punitive only. They are allowed to speak to others inappropriately. Boundaries with your children look like Setting an age-appropriate bedtime for small kids Ensuring they have healthy food options available Discussing feelings and emotions in an age-appropriate manner Not using a child as a confidant Not expecting kids to be the caregiver for younger children in the home Teaching kids to take care of themselves in an age-appropriate manner Exposing kids to age-suitable entertainment Monitoring online and social media usage Boundaries with your children sound like “You have school in the morning. At nine o’clock, it’s time for bed.” “Have you had any water today? No more juice until you have a few cups of water.” “I’m the parent; I will take care of your brother.” “Please go to your room; I need to talk to Grandma alone.” “What you’re watching is inappropriate. I’m changing settings to filter out unsuitable content.” “It’s okay to feel angry. What are some ways to behave when you feel angry?” Important Reminders Even when kids seem mature for their age, it’s essential to allow them to stay in a kid’s reality. Children don’t need to know the details of everything that happens with adults. Kids feel safe when limits are in place consistently. Teaching Kids How to Have Healthy Boundaries Adults often forget that children need boundaries, too. The forgetfulness is evidenced by adults blatantly either saying or acting as though “You’re a kid, so no one cares about your feelings.” Adults need to remember that kids Have feelings and benefit significantly from being allowed to explore and express those feelings Are impacted by the things that adults expose them to Are affected by how adults respond to their problems Hold memories about how adults made them feel Aren’t companions or confidants Lack the mental capacity to appropriately manage adult issues, no matter what their behavior reflects Have boundaries Most of the adults I work with can clearly remember how their boundaries were violated in childhood and how they still struggle to repair the damage from those violations. They also struggle to incorporate healthy boundaries in their adult lives. Children must learn that having boundaries is healthy for them. Kids are aware that they can’t demand their wishes be respected, so they request that adults hear them when they make small bids for healthy boundaries. Boundaries that a child might set sound like “Can you please stop saying mean things about Dad?” “You never pay attention to me. Why don’t you just listen?” “I don’t want to give you a hug.” “I need you to put down your phone and spend more time with me.” “I don’t like talking to Grandma; she’s always mean to me.” It’s important to listen to children when they make requests like these and to honor their boundaries whenever possible. — Setting limits with family is particularly challenging. For years, your family has grown accustomed to you acting a certain way and playing a particular role. Change becomes necessary when you no longer want a situation to stay the way it has been. As difficult as it might seem, improving boundaries with your family is likely to create better relationships with them. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. How do you feel about setting boundaries with your family? Who in your family do you think would be the most receptive to your boundaries? Who in your family do you think would be the least receptive to your boundaries? Name two boundaries that you’d like to implement with your family. What actions or follow-up might be necessary for your family to adhere to your boundaries?