Acknowledgments Before I knew what boundaries were, I developed mental limitations around things I thought were inappropriate or things that didn’t feel right. Eventually, I learned the word for those limitations was “boundaries.” Through a series of small, brave acts, I started the work of setting and keeping boundaries. I’m deeply grateful for the process and the unfolding of the power of healthy boundaries. Thank you to God for revealing to me why my life has unfolded the way it has, giving me life experiences that would allow me to live as my highest self, and for helping me form my life into words for others to receive. Thank you to my husband for listening to my vision for this book, dreaming with me, and for encouraging me to take the time to focus on writing. Thank you to my two daughters, who revealed to me the boundaries needed to be a parent. Thank you to my sister-friend Erica for our deep conversations about boundaries and for pushing me to be more of myself. Thank you to my Morning Mastermind crew—Racheal, Rebecca, and Monica—for being my cheerleading squad. I have so many wonderful friends—Talaya, Delesa, and others—who throughout this process wrote me beautiful cards, sent me gifts, and made me laugh; thank you. Thank you to all my clients who revealed my passion for helping people create boundaries. Thank you to my community on Instagram for encouraging me to create, always supporting my content, and helping me take my work to new heights. Every single day, I’m privileged to do something I love and help others. Thank you, Laura Lee Mattingly (my agent), for helping me navigate the publishing world and for pushing me (quickly) through writing a proposal. This project was made easy because Marian Lizzi (my editor) believed in this work from the very beginning and her thoughtfulness about conveying my message helped me shape this book. Thanks to her team, Jess Morphew (art director), and Rachel Ayotte (editorial assistant) for guiding me through this process. My attorney, Patrice Perkins, helped me consider the many aspects of my brand. And my assistant, Shaunsie Reed, cheered me on and reviewed my first draft. This book came to fruition because of the helpers I’ve found along the way. I am grateful for the support of my therapist, who encouraged me to write this book and highlighted my triumphs of being boundaried. Thank you, Mom and Dad, for delivering me into the world. And the biggest THANK YOU is to everyone who read this book. You are brave and you are boundaried.