8 Trauma and Boundaries Free yourself from your past with healthy boundaries. No one wanted her, so she learned to live without needing people. Amber was just one month old when she went to live with her paternal grandmother. By age ten, she’d lived with her father, grandmother, and paternal aunt—three homes with three different sets of rules. Then, when she was ten years old, her mother came back into her life. Amber moved in with her mom and stayed there until she was seventeen. It was hell. Amber’s mother had multiple boyfriends who were jerks, and she didn’t pay the bills on time, which meant they had to stay with one of the boyfriends from time to time. From ages ten to twelve, Amber was molested by her mother’s then alcoholic boyfriend. When she was fifteen years old, Amber got into a physical altercation with another of her mother’s boyfriends while trying to protect her mom. At seventeen, Amber moved out on her own. She didn’t want to be a burden to anyone, so she decided to take care of herself without asking anyone for anything. She didn’t expect anyone to do anything for her anyway. At thirty-two, Amber was fully independent and presented as successful. She had earned a master of business administration degree, and she had a career that she loved, mostly because it paid well. Despite her career success, however, Amber’s love life was nonexistent. Whenever she dated, her companions questioned how they could fit into her busy life. Sure, she wanted companionship, but she didn’t “need” people. In relationships, she made this known by creating distance. She never allowed her partners to meet her family, and she wasn’t interested in meeting their families either. She couldn’t understand why people were so “clingy,” wanting to talk daily and spend time with her. She abruptly cut people off before a relationship could get too serious. So three years ago, she just stopped dating altogether. Amber believed, “I think I’m the sort of person who needs to be alone.” She created her aloneness by establishing distance, ghosting people, and simply not being open to relationships. Once in a while, Amber spoke to her parents, but not often. She usually spoke to her father only on holidays and birthdays. Her mother was married to a guy who wasn’t as bad as the others, and her mom wanted to be close to her daughter. She called often and set up dates with Amber. While she loved her mother, Amber didn’t feel that she could trust her. After all, her mom wasn’t there for the majority of her childhood, and she couldn’t just pretend everything was okay now. Amber had also mastered being a chameleon to accommodate whatever environment she was in. At work, she was a leader and a team player. She knew that pretending to be friendly and appearing to have it all together was necessary for her career success. After thirty-two years of “keeping it all together,” however, Amber began to experience an emotional crisis. She found herself crying at work over things that typically wouldn’t bother her. She often became irritated during conversations with her mom. Usually she was able to put on a happy face, but lately she was finding herself distracted and consumed with thoughts about her childhood. After her father died, Amber came to see me. She didn’t know why she was so upset by his death. It wasn’t as if they were close. But she felt outraged. It was as if her childhood trauma was resurfacing all at once. She started thinking about being abandoned by her mother, the abuse she endured, and living with various family members but never quite feeling at home in any place. Boundaries and Trauma Childhood trauma impacts our development, as well as our ability to implement and honor boundaries. Trauma in childhood includes sexual, physical, and emotional abuse or neglect. Let’s look at each area: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) survey was created to measure the impact of childhood trauma. The ACE measures trauma in the areas of abuse, neglect, and childhood dysfunction. The ACE accounts for the following areas: Abuse: physical, sexual, emotional Neglect: physical, emotional Household dysfunction: mental illness, incarcerated relative, substance abuse, mother treated violently, divorce (it’s also traumatic to move multiple times) People with high ACE scores, which is anything over a 4, are more prone to health issues, relationship problems, and mental health challenges such as anxiety and depression. Amber’s ACE quiz score was an 8 out of 10. On the outside, she seemed to be doing well. But internally, she was sad and lonely. She didn’t have any healthy relationships, and her father had just died. All she knew was that she wanted to “feel better.” She didn’t want to be flooded with memories from the past or feel angry about her father’s death. When I mentioned boundaries to Amber, she had no clue what they would have to do with the issues in her life. I helped her connect how her current emotional state was attached to her childhood trauma. Slowly, she started to see how she had created rigid boundaries to keep people away. Amber feared emotional connections. She felt weak for feeling sad and embarrassed and didn’t want others to know about those feelings. Even when her dad died, she told anyone who asked that she was okay. But she wasn’t okay. She was suffering in silence. And as a result of burying her emotions, all her feelings were surfacing at once. For many months, Amber was resistant to therapy. She would come for a session, then cancel the next. She hated the idea of needing therapy to help her feel better. One day I mentioned that perhaps she didn’t need therapy. Maybe she just needed to feel better, and therapy was a part of that process. According to Claudia Black, a renowned addiction author, speaker, and trainer, there are three types of common boundary violations that often occur when trauma is experienced. Below are a few examples of each type. Physical Inappropriate touch Withholding affection Not being taught how to care for your body Denying a person privacy Not providing proper clothing Hitting, pushing, pinching, shoving Reading private journals or going through belongings Sexual Sexual jokes or innuendos Exposure to adult materials such as magazines or sexual videos Demeaning due to one’s gender (male/female) or sexual orientation Not being given the proper information about your developing body Forceable or coercive sexual acts Any type of sexual abuse Dismissing someone’s request to not engage in sexual acts Not respecting someone’s desire to use protection Emotional Having your feelings minimized Constantly being yelled at Being told what to feel and how to think Being told that your feelings are not okay Not showing someone how to care for themselves Being made to handle conflicts between parents Not being given appropriate expectations Gaslighting (blaming someone for something that wasn’t their fault) Discouraged from having an opinion Being taunted Directly being told that “your feelings don’t matter” or “you’re not enough” Common Issues Experienced by Adults Who’ve Experienced Abuse or Neglect Wanting to help everyone, even without the means to do so Working nonstop (equating busyness with success) Loaning people money who have proved that they won’t pay it back Oversharing in hopes of receiving love Being unable to regulate emotions Being a people-pleaser Fearing conflict Having low self-esteem Being in enmeshed relationships Being unable to make decisions without input from others Adult Abuse Adults can experience abuse, too, of course. In adult relationships where domestic violence is present, there are repeated boundary violations. In relationships where adults experience verbal abuse, emotional abuse, or emotional neglect, their boundaries are also being violated. How Trauma Impacts Attachments Boundary violation due to trauma, whether in childhood or adulthood, affects our ability to form healthy attachments. There are two unhealthy attachment styles that affect boundaries in relationships: Anxious Attachment Constantly seeking validation Engaging in self-sabotaging behavior Continually threatening to leave the relationship Frequently arguing about how committed the other person is to the relationship Breaking up often over trivial issues Persistently questioning actions and intent, as they are seen as a threat Having a paralyzing fear that the relationship will end Desiring to be close but pushing people away Demonstrating needy, attention-seeking behaviors Feeling discomfort with being alone Avoidant Attachment Continually looking for reasons to justify that the relationship isn’t working Hyperfocusing on the negative aspects of the relationship Being consumed with thoughts of getting out of the relationship Having difficulty with self-disclosure Constantly worrying about loss of autonomy Thinking “No one is good enough” Often feeling like a regular connection is “too clingy” An unhealthy attachment style uses mostly rigid boundaries. People with anxious attachments, on the other hand, tend to have porous ones. Secure attachment is marked by healthy boundaries. Secure Attachment Is able to be away from a partner comfortably Regulates emotions during disputes Has a healthy sense of self Is comfortable sharing feelings Allows others to express feelings without overreacting Amber’s attachment style in relationships was avoidant. Although she wanted relationships, she also wanted to be autonomous. She didn’t like the feeling (or idea) of having to depend on another person. As a result of emotional neglect in childhood, a person might develop counterdependence, which is characterized as follows: Counterdependence Difficulty being vulnerable with others Unwilling to ask for help Preference for doing things without help Discomfort with being attached to others Purposeful, emotional distance Persistent feelings of loneliness Inability to identify and acknowledge feelings Counterdependence may be how someone with avoidant attachment learns to protect themselves. While there’s a desire for relationships, genuinely committing to someone else feels dangerous. Therefore, they use rigid boundaries such as keeping people away or “always” saying no in order to feel safe. Shame and Guilt After Trauma Owning our story can be hard but not nearly as difficult as spending our lives running from it. Embracing our vulnerabilities is risky but not nearly as dangerous as giving up on love and belonging and joy—the experiences that make us the most vulnerable. Only when we are brave enough to explore the darkness will we discover the infinite power of our light. —Brené Brown Vulnerability is our ability to share who we are with others. We feel most comfortable being vulnerable when there is no fear of consequence. Being vulnerable allows us to be honest and open about the experiences that have shaped us. Fearing vulnerability is fearing judgment. Growing up in a dysfunctional family may make us feel shame. The shame leads to low self-esteem and people-pleasing. For people who have experienced trauma, the hardest part of living with it is the vulnerability of sharing the story with other people. We fear that if we are vulnerable, people will Think less of us Hurt us again Minimize our trauma Think we’re weak Judge us Rigid boundaries abound when we fear vulnerability, because the mission becomes staying safe. How Secrecy Impacts the Ability to Communicate Boundaries When boundaries are violated, you might feel unsure about what limits are appropriate and fear whether yours will be honored. In some families, secret-keeping is taught through sayings like “What happens in this house stays in this house.” If you decide to speak about your trauma, you may feel as if you’re betraying your family. In some cases, if this rule is broken, the consequence is a disruption of family relationships. When domestic violence is present in a relationship, telling friends or family about the abuse can seem like a betrayal to your partner. You might be aware that your partner’s behavior is inappropriate, but you still may not be ready to leave. Telling someone could prompt others to push you to act. Teaching kids to keep secrets is harmful to their growth and development. The bottom line is that children and adults should be safe to talk about what happens in their homes. How Trauma Scenarios Impact Our Ability to Implement Boundaries #1 In your relationship with your partner, whenever you try to speak up for yourself, your voice seems offensive or “stupid.” During disputes, your partner calls you names and belittles you. Result You may stop speaking up with your partner and others because you want to avoid conflict. #2 As a kid, when you tried to share something with your mother, she ignored you or quickly tried to get you to stop talking. Even in cases where you may have needed support, such as issues with kids at your school, your mother wouldn’t react. Result You developed the belief that your voice doesn’t matter. Therefore, you keep things to yourself. #3 You were sexually assaulted in college. The perpetrator said, “No one will believe you because you were drunk.” Result You never drink again, and you don’t date, because you don’t trust yourself or other people. SELF-CARE If you’ve experienced codependency, sexual abuse, physical abuse, verbal abuse, emotional neglect, or physical neglect, you may have challenges with caring for yourself. Taking care of yourself looks like Setting manageable expectations around caring and being present for others Maintaining your mental health Operating in your role as child instead of parent to your parents Operating in your role as sibling instead of parent to your siblings Asking for what you need Spending holidays doing things that you enjoy Giving people the space to care for themselves Checking in less often with people who drain your energy Figuring out who you are separately from what you were made to believe about yourself Not using your past as a reason to avoid proceeding with life Talking about your feelings Allowing yourself to feel pleasure Sharing the truth of your past without sugarcoating your experience Being gentle with yourself Teaching yourself things that you weren’t taught in childhood Learning to enjoy your body How to Work Through These Issues and Understand Them in Others Change is possible at any time, no matter what you’ve experienced in life. If you notice that your boundaries are rigid, consider ways that you can create healthier ones. For example, it’s possible to change an attachment style when you’re aware and ready to do the work of shifting parts of who you are. If you avoid commitment in relationships, consider the benefits of a committed relationship. Instead of continuing in a way that has felt comfortable in the past because of your trauma, decide to do something different. Start by sharing more information. Ask others for help with things that you would typically do on your own. Lean into the reciprocal nature of healthy relationships, and share yourself with another person as a way to build connections. If you’re in a relationship with someone who has attachment issues, instead of just accepting what you see, challenge it. Name what you’re observing. It might even be okay to share your hypothesis of the other person’s behavior. If you don’t speak up, the relationship will remain unhealthy unless and until the underlying issues are addressed. If you’re in a relationship with someone who has experienced trauma, don’t try to do the work for them by enabling them. Tell them what you see, and refer them to a mental health professional. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. In what ways has your trauma impacted your ability to set boundaries? What words can you use to reassure yourself that it’s okay to implement the limits and expectations that you need in order to feel safe?