13 Work People treat you according to your boundaries. Janine loved her job, but she hated her work environment. Sammie, one of her coworkers, came to her cubicle every day to gossip about everyone in the office. Even though she didn’t like it, she sometimes participated because she didn’t want to seem rude. Then Sammie started asking Janine to go out for drinks after work, but she didn’t want to go. Every time she was asked, she’d say something like “I can’t tonight. I already have plans after work.” But since Janine wasn’t clearly saying no, Sammie kept asking. And because Janine seemed engaged in the office gossip, Sammie kept gossiping. Janine dreaded seeing Sammie, but she felt it would be mean to say anything. Sammie caused her to be distracted at the office, which even caused her to have to take work home. Outside of her issues with Sammie, Janine often helped her coworkers with their assignments and took on additional projects from her boss. She considered her work environment toxic because she felt overworked and was frustrated by the office gossip. After twelve years at that job, Janine thought her only solution was to start looking for a new job. But before you leave a job or relationship, it’s always important to first consider these questions: “Have I tried setting any boundaries?” “In what ways do I contribute to this situation?” “What can I do to make this situation healthier?” Instead of standing in her power to control her boundaries at work, Janine thought starting fresh somewhere else would alleviate her issues. But she was bound to take her unhealthy boundaries with her to any workplace. The fresh start she needed was with herself. Set On-the-Job Boundaries At work, as in the rest of life, it isn’t realistic to try to get your needs met through waiting for situations to improve magically. Bouncing from one unhealthy circumstance to the next won’t help either. You can’t outrun your inability to set boundaries. So Janine would need to implement them wherever she worked. If I had to guess, she would have similar, if not worse, boundary issues elsewhere. Janine struggled deeply with the need to be liked—not just by certain people, but by everyone. She would bend herself to fit and do whatever kept her in the good graces of others. So if that meant being inauthentic, she tolerated that discomfort. As a people-pleaser, she feared setting limits. She worried that she would sound aggressive if she said “Get away from my desk” or “I’m not helping you with anything.” And yes, those are aggressive and mean ways to set boundaries. Instead, she could be assertive instead of aggressive, by saying things such as “Let’s chat during lunch. I have a few projects I need to push through.” “I have a lot of things on my plate, so I can’t help you with your project.” In chatting with Janine, we reviewed all the areas about her job that caused her frustration and resentment. Then we compiled the following list: Boundaries for Janine Say no to requests for assistance from coworkers. Stop participating in office gossip. When office gossip is brought up, make a clear statement about disinterest. Say no to requests for after-work gatherings (when she genuinely doesn’t want to attend). Before agreeing to new projects from her boss, allow others to work on it when possible and/or delegate the tasks to others. Janine came to realize that she wasn’t in a toxic work environment. She just hadn’t been setting appropriate boundaries. Everyday-Boundary Issues at Work The Office (the U.S. version) is one of my favorite TV shows. I began watching this show while in grad school, and at that time I was just becoming acquainted with the idea of boundaries. In the show, Michael Scott is the boss of a small paper company who suffers from constant unhealthy boundaries and self-centeredness. Michael’s boundaries are so unhealthy, in fact, that his employees are always trying to reel him in and caution him about appropriate workplace behavior. He’s unaware of the needs of the others around him and how his conduct has impacted them. In one of my favorite episodes, “Diversity Day,” Human Resources holds a training to teach Michael about proper workplace etiquette. In true Michael Scott fashion, he hijacks the training by doing an inappropriate Chris Rock skit and makes a word-association game out of racial terms, Black history figures, and religions. The funny part of this show is that Michael is so oblivious about the offensiveness of his behavior. He has no clue that he’s crossing boundaries. Isn’t this typically the case? The person violating limits has no idea how they’re affecting others. Boundary issues at work look like Doing work for others Being asked about personal issues Taking on more than you can handle Not delegating Flirting Working without pay Not taking advantage of vacation days Saying yes to tasks you can’t responsibly complete Engaging in stressful interactions Working during downtime Doing jobs intended for more than one person Not taking needed time off Boundaries are not common sense; they’re taught. Sure, some people may be aware when they violate someone’s boundaries, but most likely, they don’t know. Boundaries are not common sense; they’re taught. In the workplace, they’re passed down by the HR department, the work culture, and the bosses. When people are in fear of losing their jobs, however, it’s hard to implement boundaries. — In 2017, women began coming forward about sexual assault at the hands of the media giant Harvey Weinstein. He has allegedly assaulted at least eighty women, and for many years they didn’t come forward for fear of being blackballed in Hollywood. Given his power and influence, he was able to continue with inappropriate workplace boundaries. (He has denied all allegations.) According to the New York Times article “Harvey Weinstein Paid Off Sexual Harassment Accusers for Decades,” he created a toxic work environment in which he sexually harassed, assaulted, and bullied women in the workplace for three decades. His poor behavior was allowed because it was the culture, and he was labeled “an old dinosaur.” Even if your boundaries are dismissed because of “the culture,” it doesn’t mean they aren’t relevant and vital. It might mean that you need to tell others in the company, seek support outside the organization, or get legal advice. It isn’t okay to feel like your job will be in jeopardy if you don’t comply with toxic workplace behavior. Handling a Toxic Work Environment In a toxic work environment, your emotional and mental health status is put in jeopardy. When your work environment is truly toxic, your ability to function at home or in personal relationships will be affected. A toxic environment might include Working long hours Gossiping by several people Not being paid for additional work Cliques among coworkers Being mandated to complete more work in a limited time frame Negative communication among peers or superiors A narcissistic boss Being bullied Being sexually harassed Being mistreated based on race, physical ability, or sexual orientation A toxic work environment is devoid of healthy boundaries, but before deciding the situation can’t be improved, it usually makes sense to try setting some. Then, be consistent to see if the changes take hold long-term. It’s also important to remember that you don’t have to join in the toxicity. If you’re in a toxic work environment, try this: Consider which boundaries might be the most helpful. Identify healthy people in the toxic environment. Document, document, document your issues with dates and times. If your boss isn’t part of the problem, talk to your boss. Speak up about your needs in meetings, to superiors, and with coworkers. Talk to Human Resources about the office culture. Find support outside the office to manage your work-related stress, such as talking to a therapist. Burnout and the Impact on Work-Life Balance Burnout is a response to unhealthy boundaries. Many of the clients I see in my practice report issues with work-life balance. For fourteen years, I’ve observed people doing the work of two people, not leaving work on time, working after hours (evenings and weekends), not using allocated vacation time, and volunteering for projects they don’t have time to do. They do this all in the name of being a “good employee.” I have cautioned them, “The more you appear to handle, the more work you’ll be expected to handle.” One of the things I hear most is, “I know you’re burned out because you listen to people talk about their problems all day.” When I tell people, especially other therapists, “I’m not burned out from my work as a therapist,” they’re surprised. Is it unbelievable to think that a person who talks about boundaries all the time could actually have some pretty decent ones? Here is a list of things I do to limit the possibility of burnout: I have a cap of fifteen to twenty clients per week. I have three days dedicated to seeing clients, and the other two days I write or work on other projects. I see clients only within my niche (relationship issues). Before taking on new clients, I speak to them to see if we align energetically. I share my boundaries with my clients about how to contact me after hours. On the days I see clients, I’m intentional about managing my energy, such as avoiding potentially draining conversations outside work. I spend a few minutes before my first session in quiet, while I consider the day and set the tone. I recognize that I don’t have to be a therapist outside of work hours, so I don’t counsel people off the clock. I see a therapist myself to process issues as they come up in my life. I go on several vacations throughout the year. Here are some other ways to avoid burnout: Don’t allow one day of vacation time to go unused. Vacations are an opportunity to recharge and reset. Take advantage of this when you have an employer that offers paid time off. If your employer doesn’t offer time off, save up (if you can), and take some time to recharge. Getting out of the workplace is a meaningful way to restore your energy. Make time for yourself outside work. Find a hobby that has nothing to do with your job, and take part in it regularly. Take your lunch break away from your desk. If you must sit at your desk, don’t work through lunch. Take this time to meditate, watch an episode of The Office, go for a walk, or have lunch with a coworker while chatting about non-work-related things. Prioritize time for yourself either before or after work. Before you start your workday, take a few minutes to engage in a relaxing practice such as meditating for a few minutes, reading something uplifting, or watching something motivational. Taking a few moments before, throughout the day, or after work, will help you center your thoughts, lower your blood pressure, and provide some balance. How to Set Boundaries at Work Identify the areas where boundaries are needed. You can uncover these by tuning in to your feelings. What’s causing you to stay later? What about your job leads you to feel overwhelmed or burned out? One of my first jobs out of college was as a juvenile probation officer/case manager. Social workers have a notoriously high rate of burnout, and my office was no different. With large caseloads, daily crises, and high demands, the organization was an essential place to have boundaries. Knowing how the job could be unpredictable, I proactively completed whatever I could in advance, such as treatment plans and court reports. Doing this saved me a lot of frustration when I found myself in the middle of a crisis on a deadline day. I learned to get organized because I got fed up with the frustration of being disorganized. It helped that while at this full-time job, I was a full-time grad school student going to classes or an internship in the evening. If I wanted to keep my job, I had to set clear boundaries so I’d be able to leave on time. If at all possible, do your work only at work/only during work hours. Give yourself permission to have boundaries at work. Just because you’re at work doesn’t mean you can’t set limits. Holding back about what you need will create resentment toward your coworkers and employer. Don’t let issues go too far before you decide to set boundaries. Start setting them right at the onset of possible issues. Teach others how to respect your boundaries by being consistent with respecting them yourself. If you choose to declare your expectations, be clear and up front. Boundaries at work sound like “I won’t be able to take on any additional projects.” “I cannot work past five o’clock.” “I don’t check work emails while on vacation.” “I need more assistance with my workload.” “I don’t talk about personal subjects at work. It makes me uncomfortable.” “If you want to chat, let’s have lunch together; that way, I can focus on our conversation.” “Thank you for inviting me to hang out with you this weekend, but I won’t be able to make it.” “I don’t want to grab drinks after work, but how about going to a yoga class?” “I’m not available to help you with your request after hours. I like to focus my time on my family.” In the case of work, it’s okay to provide details about why you’re saying no, such as “I won’t be able to assist on this project because I’m helping ____ on their project.” Boundaries in the office look like Trying not to eat lunch at your desk, but if you do, don’t work while eating lunch Being direct about ending conversations that distract you from working Arriving at work on time Leaving work on time Minimizing distractions such as texting and calls to family and friends during the workday, as these exchanges prevent you from finishing your work on time Taking a nap on your lunch break; studies show that taking naps improves willpower and focus Closing your office door to minimize distractions Figuring out strategies to avoid taking work home, if possible How to Set Boundaries Away from the Office Use all your allotted vacation days. According to the U.S. Travel Association, in 2018, American workers failed to use 768 million days of paid time off—a 9 percent increase from 2017. Don’t check work emails on the weekend. Don’t go into the office to catch up on the weekend. Don’t work while on vacation unless it’s an emergency. Plan for coverage, and delegate all you can while you’re away. Find hobbies and activities that have nothing to do with work. If your job is stressful, limit the way you talk about it with others, unless it’s your therapist. Ruminating about all the things you hate will not improve your feelings. Don’t offer your professional services for free to friends and family. If you’re an accountant, for example, refer your friends and family to another accountant. Set an out-of-office email and voicemail response when you’re on vacation. Direct the caller to another person to reduce the number of issues you’ll have to address when you return. Delegate tasks that someone else can do. CEOs should never answer their own phones. Doctors shouldn’t prepare their operating rooms for surgeries. Prioritize tasks in order of urgency and deadline. Everything at work doesn’t merit the same level of importance. Minimize distractions such as chatting with coworkers if it throws you off course. Ask for assistance when you need it. Inform your employer when your workload is too heavy. Boundaries for Entrepreneurs Charge your full fee. If you offer a reduced rate, do so sparingly. Don’t work all the time. Take breaks. Pause. As a fellow entrepreneur, I know that you consistently have work to do, but guess what? You’re the boss, and you can define your limits. Avoid using phrases that are about working nonstop, such as “hustle harder,” “on the grind,” and “rest later.” How to Communicate Boundaries to Your Boss People base your ability to perform on what they think is reasonable for your role, on the needs of the company where you work, and sometimes on what your boss sees themselves as capable of doing. For instance, if a boss works in the evening and while on vacation, they may expect you to do the same. Doing anything different might be frowned upon. When this is the case, it’s your job to advocate for reasonable expectations, not requirements based on your boss’s lack of boundaries. Of course, you would never say “You’re unreasonable because you have unhealthy boundaries.” Instead, you might say, “It’s important to me to recharge when I’m out of the office in order to be fully present when I’m at work. I’d like to restrict my work, as much as possible, to the following time frames.” When communicating your needs to your boss, be sure to use “I” language. Make it about you, not them. Don’t say this: “You always give me things to do when you know my plate is full.” If you say this, your boss might feel attacked and will be less likely to consider your request. Instead, say this: “I work best with deadlines. As you give me an assignment, I will prioritize your request, but if something is urgent, please let me know.” If your boss refuses to acknowledge healthy boundaries, bring others into the situation. Reach out to Human Resources if the issue can’t be resolved with your boss. Saying No to Social Invitations and Out-of-the-Office Connections Most of us spend around thirty-five to forty hours a week working. In the office, you may build some healthy connections and eventually establish some friendships. But what happens when you don’t want to hang out after work or go to lunch with your coworkers or boss? Setting boundaries might look like Not hanging out with particular coworkers after work Not offering to help your boss with personal things Allowing a coworker to follow you on social media but restricting what they can view Muting a coworker whose content you don’t enjoy Not giving your coworker your social media handle Saying no to invites sounds like “Thanks for inviting me to your holiday party, but I won’t be able to make it.” “It’s kind of you to invite me to lunch, but I’d like to spend time alone during lunch.” “After work, I like to go home and relax.” “How about we exchange phone numbers instead of social media handles?” “I’m a homebody, so I’m not interested.” Overcoming the Fear of Perfection There is no such thing as the perfect employee. You can have ethical boundaries and still be a good employee, coworker, or entrepreneur. In every workplace, there’s a person who has at least one boundary that everyone values about them. In this case, copy what you see. If you happen to have a boss with poor limits, you don’t have to mimic their issues. Be very clear about yours, and if they’re challenged, speak up immediately. It’s true that setting boundaries will sometimes upset others. Consider this: work is where people spend the majority of their time, and your time is valuable. Therefore, being comfortable in the space where you spend the most time is essential for your well-being. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. What is one boundary that you can implement in any work environment? What is your work schedule? What times are you willing to work outside of your work schedule? Given what you know about your boss, what’s the best way to set boundaries with them? Do you need to set any with your coworkers? How do you think you’ll benefit from setting boundaries at work?