6 Identify and Communicate Your Boundaries You don’t have to be boundaryless to be loved. For as long as Eric could remember, his father, Paul, was an alcoholic. Everyone else in their family made excuses for the drinking. Eric’s mother would say, “You know he doesn’t mean it,” even keeping alcohol in the house for Paul despite the fact that she rarely drank herself. At family gatherings, everyone joined him in drinking, even though his behavior was always sloppy, loud, and embarrassing. But Eric grew tired of minimizing his father’s addiction, so he came to me wanting to learn how to address the issue. Eric told me about failed rehab attempts, mostly prompted by Paul’s work challenges. His dad would get out of rehab and stay sober for a few weeks. But sooner or later, he would start to drink again. Eric felt guilty because in his late teens and early twenties, he often shared a few beers with his dad. At twenty-five, however, Eric was no longer interested in drinking with him because his father always took it too far. In our first few sessions together, Eric described what it was like to be the child of an alcoholic. He talked about how his home life was scary and unpredictable. When Paul was drunk, he became verbally aggressive. So Eric never knew what to expect when his dad came home from work. He tried to stay out of his father’s way because he’d seen his older brother try to stand up to Paul, which resulted in several shouting matches. As a child, Eric once asked his father, “Why do you drink so much?” “Alcohol is my friend” was Paul’s answer. When I asked Eric about his current relationship with his father, he said their discussions were always all about Paul. Eric tried to make sure his dad was keeping himself busy and would ask if Paul had eaten anything. Paul frequently repeated himself, telling the same stories over and over. Occasionally, Paul would call his son in a rage and become verbally abusive. Eric never understood what prompted these rage-filled moments. As his mother continued to make excuses for her husband, Eric’s relationship with her also deteriorated. He couldn’t confide in her, because she always took Paul’s side. Trying to help his father was weighing on Eric. The one thing Eric hadn’t tried in an effort to improve his relationship with his parents was to set boundaries with them. He believed he’d set them by telling his mother, “I don’t like Dad’s drinking” and occasionally ignoring his father’s phone calls. But I gently explained to Eric that these were passive-aggressive attempts. When we passive-aggressively set boundaries, we say something indirectly to the other person, or we speak to someone who isn’t in a position to resolve the issue. Eric was indirect with his father about his expectations. He assumed Paul would catch the hint, but his father remained clueless. Instead of being direct with his dad, Eric tried for so long to ignore his own concerns and act like everything was normal. In this way, Eric’s behavior was passive-aggressive; he acted frustrated without clearly communicating his desires to his father. 4 Ways to Unsuccessfully Communicate a Boundary Passive When someone is passive, they think something like this: “I’m uncomfortable sharing my needs. Therefore, I will keep them to myself.” Being passive is denying your needs, ignoring them to allow others to be comfortable. People who communicate passively are afraid of how others will perceive their needs—maybe the other person will abandon them—so they do nothing to get their own needs met. More examples of passiveness: Having an issue but not saying anything Allowing people to do and say things with which you disagree Ignoring things that are triggering for you As we worked together, Eric expressed frustration because his mother wasn’t doing anything about his father’s alcoholism. He acknowledged how she passively responded to his father. She ignored the drunkenness and tried to get Eric and his brother to do the same. At family gatherings, she tried to include Paul in conversations even though his speech was slurred and he was belligerent. Aggressive When someone is aggressive, they might say or imply the following: “I need you to see how you make me feel.” Aggressive communication is attacking another person with harsh, pushy, or demanding words and behaviors, instead of stating what we want. Aggressiveness demands, “I want you to see how upset you made me.” When people are aggressive, they aren’t considerate of how their behaviors make others feel. Intimidating people via behavior and verbal insults or assaults is offensive. More examples of aggressiveness: Demeaning others to make your point Using yelling, name-calling, and cursing as tactics to convey your opinion Using the past to shame people Being loud and wrong (making up “facts” to pretend to be right) Confronting people to pick a fight Using cynical humor to ridicule, such as “You’re fat! You know I’m just joking; stop being so sensitive.” In contrast to Eric, his brother was aggressive toward their father. He openly made reference to Paul being a drunk. As a kid, he stood up to his father by yelling back. As an adult, he started shouting matches. Bringing up old stories was another way that Eric’s brother demeaned their father. Whenever Eric tried to talk to his brother about the aggressiveness, his brother would say, “I get it from Dad.” As Paul was aging, however, he wasn’t as intimidating. Only occasionally would he try to shame his sons. Passive-Aggressive When someone is passive-aggressive, they think something like this: “I will act out how I feel, but I’ll deny how I feel.” Sometimes when people act in a passive-aggressive manner, they do so unconsciously. We don’t always understand the reasons behind our behavior. In seeing clients for more than a decade, I’ve found that passive-aggressiveness is the number one way we communicate our feelings and needs. When people describe their passive-aggressive behavior, I say, “So you haven’t communicated your need, but you’ve acted it out?” The problem is that people can’t guess our needs based on our actions. They may not know what our behavior means or even notice that we’re trying to communicate something new. Our desires simply have to be verbalized. Passive-aggressiveness is a way we resist directly setting boundaries. To avoid confrontation, we hope the other person will figure out what they’re doing wrong and self-correct their behaviors through our indirect actions. But we don’t get what we want by pretending to be unbothered and avoiding the straightforward expression of our needs. Being indirect is counterproductive because our needs go unmet. This only makes us more frustrated and overwhelmed in our interactions with others. More examples of passive-aggressiveness: Appearing upset but refusing to admit it Making verbal attacks not related to the current situation Being moody for no known reason (often) Bringing up issues from the past Engaging in problem-focused complaining Gossiping about things you could fix but have no intention of addressing Eric was mostly passive-aggressive. He’d lament to his mother about his father’s drinking, but other than the question he asked as a child, he’d never said anything directly to Paul about the problem. Eric ignored his father’s calls sometimes, but Paul had no way of knowing this was because his son was upset. It would be easy for Paul to assume that Eric was just too busy to answer the phone. Eric thought he’d set boundaries, but he hadn’t. Manipulation When someone uses manipulation, they do or say things they hope will cause the other person to feel guilty and do what the manipulator wants: “I will indirectly convince you to do what I want.” I notice “guilting” when I hear words like “convince them to ____,” “make them ____,” or “persuade them to ____.” It’s true that manipulating people can sometimes bring results. Many adults and kids use manipulation as a way to get their needs met, pleading until they convince the other person to give in. However, here’s a way to tell the difference between manipulation and making a deal: When making a deal, even if unfair, each party is aware of what they’ve agreed to do. For kids, making a deal might sound like “If I have a good day in school, will you give me a treat when I get home?” For adults, it might sound like “If I watch an action movie with you, will you watch a rom-com with me?” The manipulated person often doesn’t know they’re being taken advantage of. Being manipulated feels confusing because the manipulator is trying to make the other party feel bad. Therefore, we tend to give in to things we wouldn’t ordinarily agree to. More examples of manipulation: Making an issue you have with them seem like an issue with you (gaslighting) Asking for help at the last minute and informing you that they have no other options Telling a story that’s intended to evoke pity Leaving out critical parts of the story to persuade you to support them Withholding affection to get you to feel bad or change your behavior Using your relationship with them as a reason that you “should” do certain things; for example, “wives should cook,” or “you should see your mother every day.” Paul manipulated his wife by talking about how stressful it was for him at work and how drinking was the only way he could unwind. When Eric spoke to his mother about Paul’s drinking, she’d say, “It’s so hard for him. Work is tough, and he’s sensitive.” She made excuses for Paul because she pitied him. Assertiveness Is the Way When someone is assertive, they will think something like this: “I know what my needs are, and I will communicate them to you.” The healthiest way to communicate your boundaries is to be assertive. In contrast to all the forms of ineffective communication previously mentioned, assertiveness is how you clearly and directly state your needs. Assertiveness involves communicating your feelings openly and without attacking others. It isn’t demanding. Instead, it’s a way of commanding that people hear you. More examples of assertiveness: Saying no to anything you don’t want to do Telling people how you feel as a result of their behavior Sharing your honest thoughts about your experiences Responding in the moment Instead of talking to a third party, talking directly to the person you have issues with Making your expectations clear up front instead of assuming people will figure them out Working on boundaries means also working on your ability to be assertive. Share them without being passive, manipulative, aggressive, or passive-aggressive. If you want to set healthy boundaries, you must do so assertively. How to Successfully Communicate a Boundary Be assertive, and follow these three easy (well, maybe not so easy, but doable) steps. My favorite Julia Roberts movie is Pretty Woman. She plays Vivian, a prostitute who falls for one of her clients, Edward (Richard Gere), a businessman. He’s charming. She’s skeptical. Outside, people get into both of their heads to try to stop the budding romance. But in the end, love prevails, and they live happily ever after (I hope). Vivian isn’t intimidated by the fact that Edward has more money than she does. She maintains the standards she sets for herself. One of my favorite lines is when Vivian says, “I say who, I say when, I say how much.” She sets boundaries, and when people don’t adhere to them, she honors them by leaving the situation. Step #1 Be clear. Do your best to be as straightforward as possible. Mind your tone—don’t yell or whisper. People will miss the boundary if you use complicated words or jargon. Take a deep, deep breath, and focus on being precise. Step #2 Directly state your need or request, or say no. Don’t just mention what you don’t like; ask for what you need or want. Identify your expectations, or decline the offer. Here are a few examples of steps 1 and 2 blended together: A friend asks you to go to a party, but you don’t want to go. “Thanks for the invite, but I’ll sit this one out.” You’re tired of hearing your friend complain about work. “Listen, I get that your job is frustrating. I want you to consider talking to someone in Human Resources or meeting with someone through your Employee Assistance Program to talk about your frustrations.” Your mother gossips to you about your brother’s new girlfriend. “I don’t feel comfortable talking about her in this way. I want you to be pleasant toward her because John likes her.” Your partner frequently mentions your weight gain. “I don’t like it when you talk about my weight; please stop.” Eric had a difficult time identifying boundaries that he wanted to set. In talking through his family issues, he realized that he needed to set them with not just his father but also his mother and brother. Because he talked to his mom most often, he started with her. He began by setting a boundary about what bothered him the most: “When I talk about my issues with Dad, I want you to listen without defending him.” Eric felt guilty after setting the limit with his mother, and he worried that future encounters might feel awkward. At our next session, however, Eric reported that his relationship with her had improved. He had also set a new boundary with his brother: “Please stop picking fights with Dad at family gatherings.” At first, his brother denied that he was aggressive, but eventually, they had a good talk about how they’d both been impacted by their father’s drinking. Eric knew he would need more time to process what he’d say to his father. That would be the most difficult conversation for him. Step #3 Dealing with the discomfort that happens as a result of setting boundaries is the hardest part. Discomfort is the number one reason we want to bypass setting them. It’s common afterward to feel guilty, afraid, sad, remorseful, or awkward. Guilt The question I’m asked most often is “How do I set boundaries without feeling guilty?” There is no such thing as guilt-free boundaries. Guilt is a part of this process. Guilt typically happens as a result of thinking that what you’re doing is “bad.” It comes from your programming about telling people what you need or want. From the moment many of us were born, we’re made to feel guilty for having wants and needs. Some adults care for children by forcing them to ignore their boundaries. Unintentionally, caregivers may force kids to hug adults they don’t want to hug. When kids don’t comply with the demands of their caregivers, they’re told, “You’re being mean,” or “That’s not nice.” Telling kids they’re bad or mean for not complying with a request is manipulative. In these small acts, we teach children that they should feel guilty for attempting to honor their own boundaries. For example, an adult says, “Hug me.” The kid says, “I don’t want to give you a hug.” Then the adult says, “Well, I’m going to feel so sad if you don’t give me a hug.” The intention is to evoke guilt. Some kids are trained to be seen and not heard. They’re taught that asking for what they want or having healthy boundaries is disrespectful. As adults, they find it difficult to shed this outdated way of thinking. You might be called a troublemaker or the difficult one as a result. But the bottom line is that it’s okay to ask for what you want. Stating your needs is healthy. And you can speak up for yourself without being disrespectful. Guilt isn’t a limitation to setting boundaries. It’s a feeling. And like all feelings, guilt will come and go. Try not to treat your guilt like the worst thing ever. Instead, embrace it as part of a complicated process—just one piece, not the entirety of the experience. So how do you deal with guilt when it’s present? Feel the guilt, but don’t focus on it. Overfocusing on emotions just prolongs them. You can carry on while feeling guilty. Have you ever been excited about something? Of course you have. You didn’t stop everything because of it, right? You didn’t miss work. You didn’t stay in bed all day. You did whatever was usually on your agenda, but you felt excited at the same time. You can also carry on with your life while feeling guilty. If you’re feeling guilty, here are some reminders: It’s healthy for you to have boundaries. Other people have boundaries that you respect. Setting boundaries is a sign of a healthy relationship. If boundaries ruin a relationship, your relationship was on the cusp of ending anyway. Finally, if guilt is bothering you, engage in your favorite self-care practice, and do a few grounding techniques such as meditation or yoga. Fear With fear, we assume the worst. My clients say, “They’re going to act weird,” “I’ll feel awkward,” or “I may not hear from them again when I try to set my boundary.” Of course we have no way of knowing how someone else will respond to our assertiveness. When someone has a history of rage and anger, it’s understandable that we would avoid setting limits with that person. But we victimize ourselves further when we let our fear prevent us from doing what we need to do. When making our expectations known, we worry about saying the right thing. The “right thing” is a matter of stating what we need through assertiveness. In Eric’s case, we went over hypothetical scenarios as to how his father might respond. Eric feared the worst—his father yelling, name-calling, and hitting walls. After all, his dad had gone into rages in the past, and for lesser offenses. Eric couldn’t think of a time when anyone had imposed boundaries on his father. Still, Eric acknowledged that his mother had imposed house rules that his dad abided by, such as taking his shoes off at the door, not smoking in the house, and going to church on Sundays. He hadn’t thought of these as boundaries that his father had accepted. He could think of other rules that his father adhered to at work, in social situations, and with other members of the family. These realizations allowed Eric to see that his dad was indeed capable of honoring limits when he wanted to do so. Sadness “I just want to be nice.” I hear this from so many people. We feel sad because we assume that setting a boundary will hurt someone’s feelings. We assume that people will be unable to handle it, but this is also worst-case-scenario thinking. Bear in mind, too, that you have no way to guess how someone else feels, so wait for them to tell you. Sometimes you feel sad because you’ve wanted the people in your life to just “get it” and self-correct, understanding your needs even though you haven’t stated them directly. When someone puts you in the position of having to enforce a boundary, you may not feel cared for in that relationship. Remorse “Did I say the wrong thing?” We wonder if we went too far, came across harshly, or even alienated the other person entirely. Immediately after stating our boundary, we may think, “What did I just say?” It’s true that words can’t be unsaid. However, expressing something that’s difficult can also save and improve your relationships. Be brave and state your boundary; it could change your life in numerous positive ways. Awkwardness “Things are going to be weird.” This is a common worry as well. Remind yourself, “Just act normal.” Stay grounded in the understanding that setting boundaries doesn’t make you a bad person but a healthy one. Recognize that you have done something good for yourself. Do what you would typically do in the relationship. If you talk to the person daily, call them the next day. Assuming that the energy between you will become weird will create the exact uncomfortable tone you wanted to avoid. So assume that people will honor your boundaries, and act accordingly. Ways to Communicate Boundaries In Current Relationships Identify the areas in which you need limits. State your needs clearly. Don’t explain yourself or provide a detailed story about what’s behind your request. Be consistent in upholding your boundaries. Restate your needs when necessary. In New Relationships Mention what you want casually in conversations as you’re getting to know people. Have an open discussion about why having your needs met is important to you. Be clear about your expectations. The first time someone violates your boundaries, let them know that a violation occurred. Restate your needs. Boundaries with Difficult People Eric was sure that his father would give him a hard time. Even after he considered how his dad respected boundaries in other situations, he was unable to convince himself that his father would listen to his big ask. Eric wanted his father to stop calling when he was drunk and to stay sober at family events. Ultimately, Eric didn’t want to ignore his father’s drinking problem, which was tantamount to supporting it. He decided that the first boundary would be telling his dad not to call when drunk. And he decided that waiting until the violation occurred would be the best time to bring it up. He brainstormed the exact words to use because he didn’t want to stumble. He would say “Dad, I don’t want to talk to you when you’re drunk. I want you to call me when you’re sober. I will talk to you when you’re sober.” The next week, Eric couldn’t wait to share with me what happened. He was half relieved and half frustrated. As soon as the boundary left his lips, his dad became defensive and denied that he was drunk. He called Eric a liar and questioned how he dared to say anything to him about what he does. Eric was completely confused about how to proceed after that explosive conversation. Here are a few examples of people being difficult when you try to set a boundary: Pushback They ignore that you mentioned a boundary and continue to do what they want. Testing Limits They try to sneak, manipulate, or get one past you. They attempt to do what they want, but in a way you might not notice. Rationalizing and Questioning They challenge the reason for your boundary and its validity. Defensiveness They challenge what you said or your character, or make excuses about how their behavior is okay. Silent Treatment They stop talking to you because they didn’t like what you said. This tactic is used with the hope that you’ll take back your boundary. — You have to be okay with some of these reactions. When setting boundaries with difficult people, it’s a good idea to decide beforehand how you’ll deal with the potential aftermath. For example, when someone violates your boundary, you can: Assertively restate it. Correct the violation in real time. Don’t let the opportunity pass and then mention it later. Say it in the moment. Accept that they, although difficult, are entitled to their response even if it’s different from the one you’d like. Decide not to take it personally. They want to do what they want to do. You’re asking them to do something uncomfortable that’s likely difficult for them. Manage your discomfort. Eric decided to proceed with the boundary he’d set with his father. The next time his dad called while drunk, Eric stated, “It sounds like you’ve been drinking. I will talk to you later.” Then he promptly hung up the phone without waiting for his father’s response. While staying consistent, Eric noticed that calls from his dad while drunk became infrequent. When they occurred, which wasn’t often, Eric restated his boundary and hung up. The Acclimation Period Allow time for people to adjust to your boundaries. If you’ve tolerated certain problematic behaviors in the past, the other person will likely be shocked. They may say things like this: “My drinking was never a problem before.” “Why have you changed all of a sudden?” During the adjustment period, it’s likely that you will need to repeat your boundaries, but try not to explain yourself. It’s essential that you religiously uphold them. Letting violations slide because you don’t feel like arguing, or it wasn’t that big of a deal, will put you back at square one. Setting boundaries is new for you and the other person. Allow both of you to acclimate to the latest standards in your relationship. Boundary Statements: I Want..., I Need..., I Expect... The best boundaries are easy to understand. Starting statements with “I need,” “I want,” or “I expect” helps you stay grounded in the truth of who you are. Here are some “I want” statement examples: I want you to stop asking me when I’m going to get married and have kids. I want you to ask me what I’m feeling instead of assuming what I’m feeling. Here are some “I need” statement examples: I need you to pick up the cake for my party on time. I need you to call me before you stop by. Here are some “I expect” statement examples: I expect you to show up at my graduation. I expect you to return my car with a full tank of gas. Follow Up On Your Boundaries with Action We think stating boundaries is hard, but it’s even harder to uphold them. People get their cues from you. If you ask them to take their shoes off in your house, you have to take your shoes off, too. If you don’t, people will use your behavior as a reason for dishonoring your boundaries. So be an excellent example of the actions you request from others. Another part of upholding the boundary you’ve set is deciding what you’ll do if it’s violated. If you do nothing, you aren’t honoring your boundary. After experiencing his initial boundary setting, Eric was ready to set the ultimate one with his father. He told Paul one week before Memorial Day, “Dad, I’m hosting a barbecue at my house. I expect you to arrive sober and not drink. If you seem to be under the influence, I will ask you to leave.” To help execute his boundary, Eric asked his mother and brother to help keep his father accountable. At the barbecue, Eric noticed that Paul was standing near the cooler with the beers. So he firmly restated his expectation to his father. Paul minimized Eric’s concerns but moved away from the cooler. It wasn’t easy for Eric to restate his needs, but he also felt it was beneficial for his father not to drink at the gathering. How to Handle Habitual Boundary Violators: Which Communication Method Is Best? State your boundary using any means necessary. I know you’ve probably heard that having a conversation in person is the best way to communicate it. This is certainly preferable, but texting or emailing might be the only way you feel comfortable doing it. Still, just like in face-to-face communication, don’t allow the conversation to get too detailed and convoluted. Don’t go into a background story, explaining the why of it all or how long you’ve been feeling put upon. If you veer away from the clear and concise script, your email or text is much more likely to turn into a heated back-and-forth exchange. So the same rules apply whether in-person or digital: always be clear by using simple and direct wording. What to Avoid When Setting Boundaries Never, Ever, Ever Apologize In my Instagram poll, 67 percent of participants stated that they cannot set boundaries without apologizing or explaining themselves. Don’t apologize for having and setting boundaries. When you apologize, it gives the impression that your expectations are negotiable or that you don’t believe you’re allowed to ask for what you want. Also, if you need to say no to a request, skip the apology. Try saying something like this: “Thanks, but I won’t be able to make it.” “I can’t help you this time.” “I hope you enjoy yourself, but I won’t be able to make it.” Don’t Waver Don’t allow people to get away with violating your boundary even one time. That one time can quickly turn into two, three, or four times. Then you’ll have to start all over. Don’t Say Too Much Stay away from telling people the who, what, when, where, and how of your boundary. Sure, you can answer one or two questions at the most, but be intentional and succinct when you respond. Remember, people may be trying to figure out a way to change your mind. Try to stick to the original statement as much as possible. Common Reasons People Don’t Respect Boundaries You aren’t upholding your boundaries with them. You didn’t speak in a firm tone. You didn’t state a need or an expectation. Your boundaries are flexible. One minute, they’re serious; the next, they aren’t. You assume people will self-correct even if you don’t tell them what you need or want. You believe that stating your boundary once should be enough. You apologize for having boundaries. You issue consequences and don’t stick to them. If you want people to respect your boundaries, you have to respect them first. Quick Tips for Handling Boundary Violations Tip #1 Speak up in the moment. When you remain silent, you give people the impression that what they said or did is okay with you. What you say doesn’t have to be well-thought-out or perfect. Simply say something like, “I don’t like it.” Saying anything is better than saying nothing. Tip #2 Verbalize your boundaries with others. Do it organically in conversation, such as “I don’t like it when people come over without calling first.” Tip #3 If someone violates a boundary you’ve already verbalized, tell them how the violation makes you feel. Then restate what you expect. Tip #4 Don’t let people slide—not even once. Review of What to Say and How to Say It There are five ways to communicate a boundary: Passive: Letting it slide. Passive-Aggressive: Acting upset without clearly stating your needs to the other person. Aggressive: Being rigid, inflexible, and demanding about what you need. Manipulation: Coercively attempting to get your needs met. Assertive: Telling people exactly what you desire clearly and firmly. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. Think of a boundary you need to establish with someone. Write down your boundary using an “I” statement: I want, I need, I would like, or I expect. Do not write the word “because” anywhere in your sentence. Don’t explain yourself, and don’t apologize. It’s okay to start small. Pick the boundary you’ll feel most comfortable sharing. How do you want to share your boundary with the other person? In person, via text, or by email? Do what feels the most comfortable and appropriate. Go back to #1. Is your statement assertive? If so, proceed. If not, reconsider how to state your expectation. Decide when you want to share your boundary—now or the next time it’s violated. Again, do what makes you feel most comfortable. Tend to your discomfort after sharing your boundary. Immediately ground yourself by engaging in a self-care practice. For example, you could meditate, write in your journal, or go for a walk.