Advance Praise for Set Boundaries, Find Peace “This is the boundary bible. Nedra teaches us not only how to set healthy boundaries but to be clear about our feelings and intentions. Finding peace requires showing up—Nedra has written the blueprint on how to not only show up but also do the work.” —Alexandra Elle, author of After the Rain “If you want the most comprehensive, relevant, and relatable guide to setting boundaries, speaking your needs, and living a more peaceful life, Nedra Tawwab’s book on boundaries is for you.” —Sheleana Aiyana, author and founder of Rising Woman “The book on boundaries we’ve all been waiting for! Nedra Tawwab offers clarity and direction with grace and compassion on a topic often discussed but rarely integrated. If you’re ready to live in alignment and shift your relationship with self and others, Set Boundaries, Find Peace is your next must-read.” —Vienna Pharaon, LMFT, founder of Mindful Marriage & Family Therapy “ Set Boundaries, Find Peace breaks down the what, why, and how of boundaries in a clear and compassionate way, leaving you confident, empowered, and prepared to tackle those tough conversations.” —Melissa Urban, cofounder and CEO of Whole30 “Without healthy boundaries, we aren’t able to fully live the life we want to live. This empowering book provides a powerful road map for establishing expectations and personal limits so that you can live your life with the safety, respect, and self-actualization that you deserve.” —Scott Barry Kaufman, PhD, host of The Psychology Podcast and author of Transcend “ Set Boundaries, Find Peace is a down-to-earth and practical guide on fully realizing your potential and giving yourself the freedom you deserve by clearly setting healthy boundaries in your personal and professional life, friendships, and relationships. Eye-opening and thoroughly engaging.” —Myleik Teele, CURLBOX founder “A comprehensive guide on how to understand and establish interpersonal boundaries... Readers who follow Tawwab on social media and those who find setting boundaries especially difficult will appreciate the advice.” — Publishers Weekly