5 What Boundary Violations Look Like People do not have to like, agree with, or understand your boundaries to respect them. For the entire first year of her relationship with her boyfriend, Jamie says they spent most days with each other and talked about their future. They enjoyed trips together without arguing, and he was a fantastic listener. But if they had a bad day, he immediately withdrew his affection. This only made Jamie crave him more. After a few days, he inevitably said all the right things to win her back. “He’s nice most of the time,” Jamie told me. “But sometimes he gets in these moods and picks at me about everything. When I don’t give him what he wants, he gives me the silent treatment and pouts.” Jamie wanted help understanding what she could do to improve their relationship. For five sessions, she talked about how she needed to understand him better, develop thicker skin, and learn to communicate in a way that worked for their relationship. I taught her some communication skills, but she said, “Nothing works.” Jamie blamed herself for not understanding what her boyfriend wanted. She was sure she was the cause of their disputes and the lack of resolution between them. Once I knew she was comfortable working with me, I asked, “Is it possible your boyfriend holds some responsibility in the communication issues?” Jamie quickly defended him. “He communicates very well. He tells me exactly what he needs, but I don’t do it correctly.” “Does he give you examples of what he wants you to do?” “No, but I have an idea of what he wants based on what he says.” After she recounted a typical conversation between them, Jamie was able to acknowledge that she’s often placed in a position where she “can never get anything right.” For example, her boyfriend might request, “I want you to cook more at home.” Then when she cooked, he’d say, “I don’t like to eat this late. Why don’t you cook earlier?” Jamie would try cooking earlier, but he would then complain about what she prepared. “You don’t listen to me,” he would say. Jamie was listening; however, she was just confused. Her boyfriend’s mixed messages kept her second-guessing what she was supposed to do. She had lost sight of what she needed, expected, and would accept because she was continually trying to please him. Our subsequent sessions together focused on the boundary violations that were taking place in her relationship. Little “b” and Big “B” Violations Boundary violations fall into two categories: Little “b”: Micro boundary violations are small violations that often occur in everyday encounters, as opposed to long-term relationships. With micro boundary violations, we aren’t usually as emotionally affected. The violation doesn’t spill over into the rest of our day, because we don’t view the encounter as significant. Micro boundary violations can become more significant over time, however, if the violations are repeated and persistent. Examples of Micro Boundary Violations You’re checking out at the grocery store and notice that the cashier has an attitude. She’s short with you in conversation and bags your food aggressively. You’re at a party, and a stranger comes up to you and starts talking. Thirty minutes go by, during which you learn so much about this person that you feel you could write a tell-all book. But not once have you gotten a word in edgewise. You tell your coworker that you won’t be able to make it to their birthday party. They tell you how important it is for you to be there and that everyone else is coming. Your coworker may really want you there, but they are guilt-tripping you, trying to manipulate you into showing up at the party. Big “B”: Macro boundary violations are big violations that erode the fabric of our relationships with others. These are long-standing and persistent. The frequency of the violations can even change the structure of the relationship. Examples of Macro Boundary Violations You’re unable to make a decision without talking to your sister, who helps you sort through everything in your life. Your friend’s drinking has become your problem to manage, and you feel compelled to help every time they relapse. When you go out, you refrain from drinking because you know you’ll have to care for your friend. You’re convinced everything that goes wrong in your relationship is your fault. Your partner has so many issues, and you need to do a better job of not triggering them. Now that you have a few examples, let’s talk about some common micro- and macroaggressions. Little “b” Microaggressions Microaggressions are subtle and can occur in any relationship. They include passive-aggressive behaviors meant to convey displeasure, hidden messages, or anger toward another. Whether intentionally or unintentionally, microaggressions communicate negativity. In the early stages of her relationship, Jamie’s boyfriend made small comments about how she spoke. Whenever she mispronounced a word or phrase, he mentioned it. She didn’t think anything of it until it became a consistent issue in their conversations. Later, when their relationship became rocky, he used her phrasing as an example of her poor communication. Microaggressions are commonly used in terms of race or LGBTQI+ bias, but they aren’t limited to derogatory behaviors or comments based solely on race, gender, or sexual preference. Here are a few other examples: Microaggression Examples Racism (Judging People Negatively or in a Derogatory Manner Based on Race) A white woman is on an elevator when a Black man gets on; she grips her purse. Underlying issue: Belief that Black people are dangerous. Therefore, they are up to no good. Body Shaming Rebecca has gained ten pounds. Her mother tells her, “Send me a picture.” Her mother responds, “Your face is so cute and chubby.” Underlying issue: Rebecca is gaining weight, and her mother is fat-phobic. Racial Bias (Assumptions Based on Race) Kevin, a Black man, is invited to an office holiday party with his mostly white coworkers. The sign-up sheet is passed around, and Kevin notices that someone volunteered him to bring fried chicken. Underlying issue: Racial prejudice. Gender Bias Tina is the CEO of her company. She often receives the label of “bossy,” while her male counterparts are described as influential leaders. Underlying issue: Belief that women in powerful positions have attitude problems. LGBTQI+ Bias Kevin takes his partner to the office holiday party, and Kevin’s coworker says, “I didn’t know you were that way. You don’t act gay.” Underlying issue: Belief that gay men present as feminine. — Microaggressions are considered harmless by the deliverer. However, microaggressions are harmful expressions of a more in-depth belief system. Though seemingly small, they have a huge impact. Ways to Handle Microaggression Assertively address what you perceive as a microaggression: “I notice that you said, ‘I don’t sound Black.’ What does that mean?” Suggest more appropriate behavior. For example, when others call her “bossy,” Tina could point out that she’s simply assertive and willing to lead. Oversharing When we overshare, it’s an effort to connect to another person. But oversharing involves telling people information that’s inappropriate based on the context, disclosing someone else’s private information, or providing in-depth personal details in a relationship that hasn’t established that level of disclosure. The oversharer usually has no idea they’ve gone too far. People overshare with me in social settings a lot. Sometimes it’s simply because I appear interested and allow them to talk without interruption. But I think it’s usually because I’m a therapist and exude an “I like listening to problems” energy. I do enjoy listening to people share, but it can be awkward socially. Oversharing Examples Inappropriate Context You’ve been assigned to train a new employee. Instead of learning about the job, your new coworker shares details about her problems with her ex. Underlying issue: This personal information isn’t appropriate in the context of your role as a trainer. Someone Else’s Information Your friend’s college roommate comes to visit, and the three of you hang out. While your friend is in the bathroom, her roommate tells you about the time your friend had an abortion. Underlying issue: Your friend’s roommate is sharing deeply personal information about someone else. In-Depth Personal Information While picking up groceries, Megan asks the cashier, “How is your day going?” The cashier starts to tell Megan about an argument she had with her boyfriend about his sex life with his ex-girlfriend. Megan stands there listening to the story, feeling nervous and uncomfortable. Underlying issue: The cashier’s disclosure is deeply personal and not appropriate for this interaction. — Oversharers are usually clueless about how they are impacting others and violating boundaries. In an attempt to connect and build closeness, they give too much information. The oversharer often ignores the nonverbal cues from others that the conversation has gone too far. Ways to Handle Oversharing Gently redirect the person to a more appropriate topic. Assertively say “Wow, this seems like a critical conversation that we should have at another time.” Say something like “I don’t feel equipped to help with this situation. Do you mind if I change the topic of the conversation?” Guilt Trips Whenever Jamie tried to talk to her partner about their communication, he told her she had issues communicating her needs. He insisted that her problems in past relationships were due to her poor communication. Jamie became convinced that she was the one with the issue, so she felt terrible bringing it up to her boyfriend. When someone intentionally tries to make you feel bad, they are guilt-tripping you. Guilt-tripping is a manipulative strategy that people use to persuade you to do what they want. They hope you’ll feel bad, comply, or agree to something, even though you might not have done what they’ve accused you of doing. Guilt Trip Examples Ending Toxic Relationships Rob had an abusive father and felt he had to end his relationship with his dad. Even within his family, he was subject to social scrutiny. Both family members and friends disagreed with his desire to terminate the unhealthy relationship. His sister said, “He’s your father. You have to talk to him.” Underlying issue: Rob’s sister devalued the importance of setting boundaries when a relationship is unhealthy. Lacking Interest in Relationships with Certain People Amy knew her boss was a “mean girl.” When her boss invited her out for drinks after work, Amy declined. Her colleagues told her, “You could’ve at least gone out and had one drink.” Underlying issue: Amy’s coworkers didn’t feel confident enough to say no. Being Particular About What You Like You decide to bring some food for yourself to an upcoming family dinner because you know your eating preferences are different from everyone else’s. Your cousin says, “Why do you need a special diet? Is the food here not good enough for you?” Underlying issue: Your cousin is questioning your preferences and implying that you should change. Not Pleasing Others Carla was at a reunion lunch with friends from high school and said, “I don’t want to get married or have kids.” Her friend Pat said, “Everybody should have kids. Why wouldn’t you want to get married? You’re so nice.” Underlying issue: Pat tried to impose her values on Carla. Saying No Without Giving an Explanation A friend asks you, “Hey, can you help me move?” You respond no. Your friend says, “Why not? I need your help.” There are times when it’s okay to explain. Just be mindful of how the person has responded in the past to your explanations. If they accepted the explanation and moved on, go ahead and offer a brief reason. If explaining created a disagreement, keep your response brief. Underlying issue: People want you to have a reason they perceive as valid. — People who use guilt trips are trying to get their needs met, but their needs may violate the requirements you have for yourself. Ways to Handle Guilt-Tripping Call it out: “Are you trying to make me feel bad about my decisions?” Make the conversation about you, not them: “It’s nothing personal. I just have preferences for myself.” Declare that you’ve made your decision: “Your response seems like you’re trying to change my mind.” Big “B” Macroaggressions Boundary violations that disrupt the fabric of a relationship are in the macro category. While violations occur routinely as a part of the relationship dynamic, macro violations, such as enmeshment, codependency, trauma bonding, and counterdependency can cause long-term damage. Enmeshment In enmeshed relationships, individualization is not acceptable. Neither are boundaries. These relationships thrive on each person being very similar to the other. If one person makes attempts to set limits, create new roles, or shift the dynamics, the relationship is in danger of termination. This is enmeshment: Inability to be different from the other in a relationship Lack of individual identity Unclear sense of self separate from the other person Lack of boundaries Confusion between the quantity of time spent together versus the quality of the time spent together Oversharing Absorbing the emotions of the other person as your own Rejection by the other person if you attempt to form an individual identity Enmeshed relationships violate boundaries in the following ways: Little personal space is given, emotionally or physically. The thoughts of both people must be aligned. Life decisions are based on mutual agreement and no independence of thought. Sharon Martin, LCSW, defines enmeshment as “family relationships with weak boundaries, lack of emotional separation, and intrusive demands for support or attention that prevent family members from developing a strong and independent sense of self.” Family relationships, dating relationships, and relationships at work can all suffer from enmeshment. Examples of Enmeshment You start dating someone and begin spending all your time together. Their likes become your likes. Your friends and the life you had before are suddenly diminished. You were pretty sure you wanted to buy a new house, but after talking to your parents, you changed your mind. Your parents always know what’s best for you. Your friend is having issues with her partner. She always calls you to problem-solve their issues. You willingly help because you want her to be happy. You’re even invited to speak with her partner about what you and your friend think is best for the relationship. Boundaries for Enmeshment If you agree to help, ask how they plan to handle their problems in the future. Allow for physical space in the relationship. Assess your need for constant contact with another person. Bring other people into the mix to create additional support. Before you share, ask if it’s the appropriate time and setting. Reclaim or create your self-identity, separate from anyone else’s. Codependency In codependent relationships, we believe we must help people avoid consequences, saving them from unpleasant experiences. We think it’s our role to protect them. But rather than protect, we enable the other person to continue their unhealthy behavior. We see the person we’re enabling as helpless and unable to take care of themselves without us. The term “codependent” has been around for decades and is often used when describing dysfunctional family dynamics, especially when addiction is involved. But codependency pertains to any relationship where people become emotionally entangled with the feelings and outcomes of others. In codependent relationships, it’s challenging to separate what we feel from what others think and feel. Codependency is well-meaning, but we suffer because our own needs are often unmet or unnoticed. In fact, as codependents, we have a hard time distinguishing our needs from the needs of the other person. Enabling is a significant part of a codependent relationship. It involves supporting the unhealthy behaviors of someone through action or inaction. Codependency usually happens as a result of unhealthy boundaries. This is codependency: Overextending yourself Avoiding discussions about real issues or problems Cleaning up the mess that others created for themselves Making excuses for the poor behavior of others Tending to other people’s needs and neglecting your own Doing things for people instead of helping them do things for themselves Taking care of people with toxic behaviors Feeling as if when something happens to other people, it’s happening to you Describing other people’s problems as if they’re your own Having difficulty existing in relationships without becoming “the rescuer” Troubleshooting problems for others before thinking of your own issues Letting people rely on you in an unhealthy way Having one-sided relationships In codependent relationships, one or both parties are dependent on the other for their survival. Therefore, codependency often leads to resentment, burnout, anxiety, depression, loneliness, depletion, and severe mental health issues. Being present for someone who won’t care for themselves is hard work, but codependent relationships are harmful to all parties. For the enabler, their own needs are never (or rarely) met. For the enabled, they don’t learn how to meet their own needs. So both people become worse together in codependent relationships. People who are codependent suffer from unhealthy boundaries, self-esteem issues, people-pleasing tendencies, and the need for control. By helping toxic people, they receive a sense of fulfillment. When I was in college, I loved watching the reality-TV show Intervention. It’s a show about families and friends trying to convince their addicted loved ones to get professional help. The people on the show usually talk about how they have enabled the addict to continue their addiction by offering money or a place to stay, for example. In some cases, people admitted to even enabling the addict to do drugs in their homes because they felt it was safer. About halfway through the show, the friends and family members meet with a recovery coach who talks about how codependency has to stop if they want to save their loved ones. The recovery coach encourages healthy boundaries. Examples of Codependency When you go out with your friends, you refrain from drinking because you know they’ll get drunk. You buy them drinks because you know they’ll be upset with you if you don’t. When your friend has had too much to drink, you drive them home and stay with them through the night to make sure they’re okay. You worry about their drinking even when they don’t seem to be concerned. You see the consequences of their actions, and you attempt to rescue your friends. You’ve observed your sister mismanage money to such a degree that she’s been unable to provide financial support to her teenage children. As a result, you’ve become a surrogate parent to your niece and nephew. They call you when they need something because they know their mom will say no. You help because she mismanages her money, and you don’t want them to suffer because of her poor choices. Boundaries for Codependency Set clear expectations with regard to how you can help. Provide feedback about how the other person’s behaviors are affecting you. Support people without doing things for them. Wait for people to ask for help instead of offering before they ask. Honor your commitment to yourself about what you will and will not tolerate in relationships. Be vocal about toxic behaviors you observe. Take care of yourself. Hold people accountable for caring for themselves. Help while teaching people how to help themselves. Trauma Bonding Trauma bonding happens as a result of emotional and intellectual boundary violations. Over time, a person is manipulated into believing that in some way they deserve what’s happening to them. They think what’s done to them is by accident or not intended to harm. Trauma bonding can occur in friendships, dating relationships, or family relationships. This is trauma bonding: Being made to believe that everything is your fault (gaslighting) Breaking up and then going back to unhealthy relationships Making excuses for the other person’s poor behavior toward you Feeling like you can’t get out of a toxic relationship Cycling from harsh treatment to kindness Not telling others how you’re treated in your relationship because you fear they will see it as abuse Not standing up to someone who mistreats you Examples of Trauma Bonding Jamie blamed the issues in her relationship on herself. She knew her boyfriend had problems, but she took ownership whenever he became triggered. She was afraid to share her relationship issues with her friends for fear they would judge her and her boyfriend. Your father is verbally aggressive. He says you caused him to become angry because you didn’t listen to him. After the verbal attacks, he becomes affectionate and buys you small gifts. Your friend is mean to you in front of your other friends. You know he has a hard time in social situations, so you brush off his behavior. You believe he’s mean simply because he feels uncomfortable. Boundaries for Trauma Bonding Be clear about how you expect to be treated. Stop people immediately when they say something mean or something that makes you feel uncomfortable. Tell them “What you said makes me feel uncomfortable.” Share your relationship issues only with people you trust. Act early when you notice a pattern forming. Counterdependency Counterdependency happens when we develop rigid boundaries to keep people at an emotional distance. Attachments to others are impaired with counterdependency, as you are trying to avoid connection, even when a relationship is healthy. This is counterdependency: Difficulty being vulnerable Inability to ask for help Discomfort accepting help from others Disinterest in the lives of others Preference for doing things yourself Fearful of being close to others Emotional distance Quickly feeling overwhelmed when people are vulnerable Pushing people away when things become too serious Constant feelings of loneliness Examples of Counterdependency You meet a nice person and go on several dates with them. Everything seems to be going well, but you ghost them because they share how much they like you. Your friend gives you a card for your birthday that is loving and tender. You don’t tell your friend how the card made you feel. Boundaries for Counterdependency Practice sharing details of your life with others. Tell people how they make you feel. Ask for help. Accept help if someone offers. — In this chapter, we explored micro- and macro-level boundary violations. These may be violated in any type of relationship—with coworkers, friends, family, romantic partners, and strangers. So some violations are smaller than others. When a stranger violates your physical space, one time might not be significant. But if your coworker repeatedly violates your need for physical space, it’s a much bigger problem. It’s vital not to take ownership of how others treat you or to make excuses for their behavior. How they treat you is about who they are, not who you are. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. How do you think your life will be different once you’ve established healthy boundaries? In what relationships have you established healthy boundaries? What are some specific actions you can take to improve your boundaries?