3 Why Don’t We Have Healthy Boundaries? Boundaries are the key to healthier relationships. “You are now the man of the house,” Justin’s mother said to him after his parents divorced. He was twelve years old. Suddenly feeling responsible for his younger brothers, Justin began watching them after school, started their dinners in the evening, and helped get them ready for bed. He even took them along when he hung out with his friends. Justin’s mother was absent a lot, both physically and emotionally. When she wasn’t working, she was debilitated by depression in the wake of the divorce. His father had moved on and was dating a woman who had children of her own. So even though he was still a child himself, Justin became the caretaker and emotional support for his family. His mother asked his opinion about how to take care of his brothers. She cried and shared her emotions about the divorce with him. Among his peers, Justin was considered “mature” for his age. They saw him as wise, so they quickly opened up to him. When he came to me, Justin was twenty-nine years old, but he was still heavily involved in caring for his brothers. In fact, he was the go-to person for most of the people in his life. His friends leaned on him for sound advice, both his parents called him whenever there was an issue with his brothers, and his brothers used him for financial and emotional support. By twenty-nine, he was tired of always playing the role of the responsible problem solver, but he couldn’t see a way out. After all, everyone needed him. The pattern even affected Justin’s romantic relationships. He always found the “project” person to date—someone who needed help. His longest relationship lasted nine months, but once his partner no longer needed him, the relationship quickly fizzled. He was aware that he tended to attract needy people. He didn’t particularly enjoy helping others, but he did believe his help was necessary. As he constantly gave to others, Justin never asked for help for himself. He was self-sufficient and self-reliant, and feeling helpless made him uncomfortable. Even when a girlfriend tried to do something nice for him, he didn’t like it. He hoped to get married and have children. But maintaining attachments with anyone other than his existing family and friends was a challenge. Justin needed to learn how to acknowledge his emotional needs and allow others to be there for him. During his parents’ divorce, he came to the conclusion that his needs were too complicated for others and that he was better at giving support than receiving it. It was clear that his relationship issues were the product of the emotional neglect he’d experienced as a child. Emotional neglect happens when you don’t receive sufficient emotional support from a parent or caregiver. They may not understand a child’s needs, or they may devalue the need to nurture a child’s emotional well-being. People who are emotionally neglected are often confused about what they experienced. There’s a difference between emotional abuse and emotional neglect, however. Emotional neglect is unintentional, while emotional abuse is more deliberate. People who experienced emotional neglect tend to have issues developing healthy attachments to others, whether their attachment is anxious or avoidant. We focused Justin’s initial recovery on learning how to set emotional boundaries with his brothers and parents. At first, he felt uncomfortable saying to one of his brothers, “Have you asked Mom?” rather than jumping to solve a problem for them himself. He also felt it would be mean to speak to his mother about no longer being her emotional confidant. But over time, Justin noticed how his family began to see him differently. He started to talk more about himself with them and with the women he dated. He began to trust that people wanted to know about him and what he was feeling. Eventually, he was able to date someone for more than a few months. He became a son to his parents again, rather than parenting them. It wasn’t comfortable for him in the beginning, but Justin was gradually able to communicate and uphold his boundaries. What’s Keeping Us from Having Healthy Boundaries? It’s your responsibility to tell people how burdened you are in your relationships. Justin knew he wanted to step back from the caretaking role with his siblings. He was tired of being the emotional support for his parents, and he knew he had dating issues. But he didn’t realize the solution to his problems could be setting boundaries in his relationships. “It’s Them, Not Me” For our relationships to improve, we assume that the other person has to change. We’re unaware of the aspects that are within our control, such as setting boundaries. But when we do set boundaries, our relationships change because we’ve changed what we’re willing to tolerate. “We Tried Once, and It Failed” When we set a boundary and nothing changes immediately, we often assume it’s a lost cause. But there are many reasons why people don’t immediately adhere to our request, so the way we communicate it is critical. What we do after we’ve stated what we want is also vital. (You will learn the best ways to set and maintain boundaries as you continue reading.) Misinterpreting What Boundaries Are There’s more to boundaries than saying no. A common misconception about boundaries is that they always mean saying no. But we can set boundaries in many ways; saying no is just one of them. Justin set his by redirecting his brothers to talk to their parents about specific issues. He also set boundaries with himself about being more emotionally transparent in his interactions with others. Justin didn’t exactly say no to his parents when they tried to use him as their emotional support. However, he was forthcoming that he felt uncomfortable hearing about certain topics. There’s more to boundaries than saying no. The Reasons We Tolerate Boundary Issues We Aren’t Aware That We Need to Set Boundaries In Chapter 1, we discussed signs that we might need to set a boundary. The most significant symptom is discomfort, which manifests itself as anger, resentment, frustration, and burnout. When we feel any of these, we likely need to set a boundary. We tolerate unhealthy boundaries because we don’t understand our feelings, and we fail to notice the discomfort. We see that something is “off,” but we’re unaware of what is causing the discomfort. The film What’s Eating Gilbert Grape? is a great example of this. Gilbert (played by Johnny Depp) is a parentified teenager who cares for his younger siblings, one of whom is autistic (Arnie, played by Leonardo DiCaprio). Gilbert also cares for his mother, who is obese and housebound. Her weight gain began after her husband committed suicide. Gilbert struggles to have a social life outside of his family because he has unhealthy boundaries. Two of his siblings manage to build their own lives—one becomes the manager of a bakery, and the other goes away to college. But when Gilbert starts a romance with a girl visiting his town, nothing comes of it because he doesn’t create any boundaries with his family. While Gilbert is aware something is off, he isn’t aware that healthier limits could help him start a life outside of the one he’s known. We Focus on the Worst-Case Scenario Despite the fact that the worst-case scenario is often the least likely to occur, our fears of the worst tend to keep us from setting boundaries. Here are some typical worst-case-scenario thoughts: “What if they get mad at me?” “What if they want nothing to do with me?” “What if I lose a friend/family member?” “What if I say the wrong thing?” “Is setting a boundary petty?” “What if I’m called selfish?” “I don’t think anyone will listen to me.” Worst-case-scenario thinking is fear-based, and it’s the wrong hypothesis about what is most likely to happen. We can’t predict the future. We can’t predict how people will respond to our boundaries. The only thing we’re able to control is our own behavior. Our biggest fear is that we’ll lose people, so we tolerate boundary issues to maintain our relationships. We Feel We Can’t Tolerate the Discomfort of Setting Boundaries Setting limits is uncomfortable, and that discomfort is enough for most of us to shy away from setting them. So we stay silent. We can’t tolerate the discomfort of having what we assume will be difficult conversations (worst-case-scenario thinking again). One of the things I teach people is how to manage the discomfort of setting boundaries. We may not feel comfortable having difficult conversations, but we can do it. The short-term discomfort of setting a boundary isn’t a reason to continue tolerating the longer-term discomfort of the issues that inevitably result. Unhealthy relationships are frustrating and damaging to our long-term well-being. Over time and with consistent practice, setting boundaries becomes easier. Where We Learn About Boundaries Family Is Where It All Starts We are born with the urge to have our needs met. That’s why we cried, fussed, and acted out when we wanted something. We learned whether we could get our needs met based on how our parents and other caretakers responded. Parents/caregivers can guide us toward either healthy or unhealthy boundaries. From birth, the family is our primary teacher. We first learn from our mother and father, then others in the home environment, including siblings and extended family. In many cases, when we think about boundaries in the family, we think about rules set by our parents. Boundaries are not necessarily rules, however. Limits that parents have with children are expectations, preferences, and sometimes rules. Parents and caregivers typically feel comfortable communicating their expectations to children. But children often feel they don’t have a right to set boundaries for themselves. Respecting Kids’ Boundaries When my oldest daughter was around four months old, she started to demonstrate disdain toward her caregiver at our local family gym. Generally, my daughter enjoyed being held, but she didn’t like this one person in child care. Whenever we left her in child care, she would cry—so much so that they’d pull me away from a workout class to get her. It took me a few days to notice that she cried only with a particular worker. After that realization, I made a point of calling the gym beforehand to see who was working in child care that day. If it was the person my daughter seemed to be uncomfortable with, I’d wait for her shift to end before going to the gym. My daughter at four months expressed a preference for whom she did and didn’t like; I respected her preference by not forcing her to be with people who made her feel uncomfortable. Children have boundaries unless they’re shown or told it isn’t okay to have them. For kids, food preference is an attempt at setting limits. They may not know what’s best in terms of nutrition, but they know what they don’t like. Their food preferences are based on texture, smell, color, and taste. When a child sets a boundary such as not wanting to eat a particular type of food, how does the parent respond? Offer other options (possibly along with the food the child didn’t want). Insist that the child eat what they said they didn’t like. Punish the child by not allowing them to eat anything. Here’s an idea of what the child understands about their ability to set boundaries: Option 1: “I hear you. I want you to eat something, so I will honor your request by presenting other options.” Option 2: “Your boundaries are not important to me, and I know what’s best for you.” Option 3: “You will be punished for having preferences. Do what I say.” When a child sets a boundary such as “I don’t want to hug your friend,” how does the parent respond? Allow the child to be self-selective about whom they feel comfortable showing affection to. Push the child to hug the friend. Shame or threaten the child by saying “It’s not nice to tell people no when they ask you for a hug,” or “If you don’t hug them, you’ll get a spanking.” Here’s an idea of what the child understands about their ability to set boundaries: Option 1: “I hear you. If you feel uncomfortable showing someone affection, I will respect your preference.” Option 2: “Your boundaries are not important to me, and I know what’s best for you.” Option 3: “You will be punished for having preferences. Don’t embarrass your parents. Other people’s feelings are more important than your own.” To raise healthy children, it’s essential to allow them to have healthy boundaries. This can happen when we allow them to have a preference as to what they eat, what they wear, who they like, how they feel, and who they allow in their physical space. Modeling Children have never been very good at listening to their elders, but they have never failed to imitate them. —James Baldwin Parents teach children by modeling. Parents who don’t model healthy boundaries inadvertently teach kids unhealthy boundaries. I’ve worked with women who struggle to take good care of themselves. When I ask them, “Did you see your mother caring for herself?” they inevitably answer no. These women not only don’t know how to care for themselves, but they also feel severe guilt when they do practice self-care. They’ve been taught that self-care is selfish and would make them a bad person. They’ve seen their mothers personify a selfless image of womanhood, so in their attempt to be a woman, they repeat what they saw. But our mothers were burned out, too. It’s just that their generation often believed that they were obligated to do everything for others without complaint. Awareness of the need for self-care is on the rise today, and self-care is becoming acceptable. But it hasn’t always been that way. Just a few decades ago, the literature on self-care was sparse. At Barnes & Noble in 2018, books about self-care outsold books on diet and exercise. In the last few years, people have begun to learn that weight issues are often a symptom of the mental and emotional health issues they face. What many people don’t realize, however, is that often, poor self-care is an issue with boundaries. When we consistently exercise, we set expectations for ourselves, defining what behaviors and habits we can and cannot accept. We won’t find time to go to the gym or eat well if we don’t have healthy boundaries with ourselves. When It Isn’t Okay to Say No Children learn whether it’s okay to say no from their parents. Learning is either direct or indirect. Firsthand, children see how their parents respond to being told no, either by siblings, other family members, or outside adults. The parents’ response to being told no informs the child about whether it’s okay to say no. If children receive the message “I cannot say no,” then they will struggle with saying it. This message doesn’t have to be verbalized explicitly, such as “You cannot say no to me.” A parent’s reaction, such as giving the child the silent treatment, dismissing their concerns, or ridiculing the child for having a need, are all equal to communicating that saying no is not okay. Learning from Others Although the family is the first arena where we learn, we also learn from the other people in our lives. These include teachers, peers, television and movie personalities, and other adults. Childhood Issues That Impact Boundaries, Such as Trauma, Abuse, or Neglect Trauma Trauma is any event or life experience that causes you to feel deeply distressed. These events don’t have to be a firsthand experience. We can be traumatized by what we observe someone else experience. For example, if we witness domestic violence in our home, we’re impacted even if we are never physically or verbally abused ourselves. We may experience trauma as a result of Death of a loved one A bad accident Abuse/Neglect Bullying Abandonment Divorce An incarcerated parent The experience of trauma shifts our brain and body into survival mode. This is one way in which unhealthy boundaries become a tool for survival. If we believe our survival hinges on our relationships, it will be exceedingly hard to set boundaries in those relationships. If we feel that we have no other options or way to get out of a particular situation, setting limits may not seem like a reasonable course of action. Abuse Physical abuse and emotional abuse are boundary violations. When people are unaware that this type of treatment is wrong, they may view abuse as an expected part of a relationship. Victims of physical or emotional abuse find it hard to set boundaries with their abusers. When victims start to believe they are responsible for their abuse, or when they start to sympathize with the perpetrator, trauma bonding occurs. Trauma bonding limits our ability to set boundaries because we think we’re the cause of the perpetrator’s actions. People who grew up in abusive homes have a higher likelihood of developing trauma bonds later in life. Also, the longer the abusive relationship continues, the harder it is to leave. Trauma bonding happens in families where children believe that they are responsible for what is said and done to them. Verbal abuse example: “If I would’ve listened, my mom wouldn’t have yelled and called me names.” Physical abuse example: “My dad had been drinking. I should’ve known better than to ask him for anything. He hits me when he’s been drinking. I have to stay out of his way.” In adult relationships, the situation may look different, but trauma bonding can still be a part of the relationship. Verbal abuse example: “My partner doesn’t like questions; that’s why he yells at me when I ask questions. I need to figure things out without pissing him off.” Physical abuse example: “When my wife is upset, she throws things at me. It’s just how she deals with her rage.” When you’re manipulated into believing that the abuse was your fault, it’s a boundary violation. Regardless of the reason behind the abuse, it’s never okay for someone to abuse you. Even if the person is a parent, partner, or someone you trust, manipulation is an essential factor. People who have been abused find it especially challenging to believe that others will be willing to meet their expectations. Physical Neglect This kind of neglect involves the absence of necessities or lack of care given to physical needs. Children who are physically neglected may not be adequately nourished or may appear unkempt. While we might assume the neglect is because of a lack of finances, this isn’t always the case. Neglect can occur even in homes where financial resources are available. Emotional Neglect This is the absence of “enough” emotional attention. Emotionally neglectful loved ones can be well-meaning, so victims of neglect tend to sympathize with the neglectful person. It may seem ironic, but emotional neglect can sometimes be a result of too much closeness. Enmeshment prevents us from establishing a sense of individuality. It leads us to believe that we are responsible for how others feel, so we protect and shield them from what we perceive as undesirable outcomes. But meeting the emotional needs of a parent is not a job for a child. — Here’s a reminder for adults who experienced emotional neglect in childhood: It was never your job... To be the man of the house. To be a confidant for your parent. To take care of your siblings. To learn things without parental guidance. To keep the peace within a chaotic home. To figure things out without emotional support. To be responsible for bills when you were a kid. Kids’ boundaries are violated when kids are placed into adult roles—even when these roles happen as a result of necessity. In Justin’s case, someone needed to be there to help with his younger brothers. But another adult, such as his dad or a grandparent, could have taken on that responsibility. Consider the damage done to Justin’s relationship with his parents and siblings. He didn’t have a normal sibling relationship with his brothers, as he was tasked with managing their needs. With his parents, he was a confidant and was unable to get his own emotional needs met by his parents. When someone neglects us, it’s hard for us to believe that they would be willing or able to accept our requests. In Chapter 8, we will dive deeper into how trauma impacts our ability to set and execute boundaries. Thought Patterns That Stop Us from Setting Boundaries 9 Potential Reasons Why You Can’t Sufficiently Set a Boundary You fear being mean. You fear being rude. You’re a people-pleaser. You’re anxious about future interactions after a boundary has been set. You feel powerless (and not sure that boundaries will help). You get your value from helping others. You project your feelings about being told no onto others. You have no clue where to start. You believe that you can’t have boundaries in certain types of relationships. You Fear Being Mean Your biggest fear is being mean. But what is “being mean” really? When you say “I don’t want to be mean,” you’re assuming that what you say to another person will be perceived that way. But how do you know what others see as mean? The truth is, you don’t. The fear of being mean is based on the assumption that you know how the other person will view your words. But assumptions are not facts; they’re hypotheses. Experiment with assuming that people will fully understand what you say. You Fear Being Rude How you verbalize your boundary matters. In Part 2 of this book, we’ll go into depth about exactly how to state your boundaries. We tend to assume that when we declare what we expect, we can do it only by yelling or cursing. Typically, this is the case when we’ve reached a breaking point and have waited too long to set the boundary. But if you’re proactive about it, you won’t have to reach a breaking point. Then you’ll be able to communicate your limits respectfully. If you’ve reached a boundary-breaking point, however, you can practice what to say, which will help you assertively deliver your expectations without yelling or “being rude.” You’re a People-Pleaser The hardest thing about implementing boundaries is accepting that some people won’t like, understand, or agree with yours. Once you grow beyond pleasing others, setting your standards becomes easier. Not being liked by everyone is a small consequence when you consider the overall reward of healthier relationships. People-pleasers tend to be consumed with thoughts about what others are thinking and feeling. They want to appear as good, helpful, and inviting. For people-pleasers, setting a boundary is especially hard because their worst fear is being disliked, on top of the fear of being mean or rude. These fears are often significant enough that people-pleasers would rather suffer in relationships without limits than face their fears. You’re Anxious About Future Interactions After a Boundary Has Been Set The fear is, “Things will be awkward between us after this.” Well, declaring a fear makes it so. If you state that you’ll behave awkwardly during your next encounter, you will. What if you continued the relationship normally instead? State your boundary, and proceed with typical business. You can’t control how your request is received, but you can choose to behave in a healthy way afterward. Maintaining a level of normalcy will help keep future encounters healthy. Do your part. Model the behavior you’d like to see in the relationship. You Feel Powerless (and Not Sure That Boundaries Will Help) You attend to every problem except the lack of healthy boundaries. You assume that even if you set one, people won’t listen. You think about the worst-case scenario and become consumed with thoughts about how establishing a boundary will never help. But if you execute and uphold your boundary, it will work. Staying consistent is essential if you want others to adhere to your boundaries. You Get Your Value from Helping Others “I’m a helper.” There’s nothing wrong with that, but you can be a helper without being a pushover. Help people and set a boundary. Limits create clarity about how you are willing and able to help. After all, helpers, who are typically overwhelmed with caring for others while neglecting themselves, need boundaries, too. You Project Your Feelings About Being Told No onto Others You hate being told no—so much so that you hate telling other people no. It’s natural to dislike it when you don’t get what you want, but being told no is healthy. It’s likely an indication that the other person has healthy boundaries. If you learn to manage your feelings about being told no, you will become a more sympathetic boundary-setter. But don’t assume that others will feel the same way you feel. Allow people to have a response before you presume how they will feel. They might be open to your boundaries. You Have No Clue Where to Start Getting started is your biggest hurdle. “What do I say? What if they don’t like it?” These are good questions. That’s why in this book we’ll address what to say, when to state your boundary, and what to do if it isn’t well received. When you’ve practiced unhealthy boundaries for so long, it’s hard to consider your options. You’ve grown accustomed to not having choices. While reading this book, you will gain a lot of ideas about possible boundaries that you can implement in various scenarios. You Believe That You Can’t Have Boundaries in Certain Relationships You might think, “I can’t tell my mother that I don’t like ____.” Instead, think, “How can I tell my mother that I don’t like ____?” In every relationship, you can set boundaries. It’s a matter of how you set them. Many people find it hardest to communicate expectations to family, but hard doesn’t equal impossible. The hardest thing can be overcoming your belief that the process is complicated. Again, assuming the worst is what most often stops us from even trying. Uncomfortable Feelings That May Arise from Setting Boundaries Depending on your relationship to the other person, your connection to the situation, and how long you’ve gone without setting a boundary, you may experience discomfort (guilt, sadness, betrayal, or remorse). Three things prolong uncomfortable feelings: Minimizing: This is the result of denying the impact of life events or trying to reduce their meaning. For example: “I was stood up for a date, but it doesn’t matter because I had other things to do anyway.” Ignoring: You act as though your emotions don’t exist. Moving on too soon: When you try to push through a painful experience without feeling your emotions, you prolong the journey of recovery. Rushing the healing process will also likely lead to repeating the same mistakes. Guilt The number one question I’m asked about setting boundaries is “How can I set one without feeling guilty?” My immediate thought is “You can’t.” I know, I know—I’m a therapist; there must be something I can do to make boundaries guilt-free. But, nope, there isn’t. What I can do is help you deal with your discomfort. I can help you feel better about saying no. Coping with discomfort is a part of the process of establishing a boundary. In Chapter 6, we will go in depth about ways to manage your discomfort around setting boundaries. Sadness Sometimes we feel sad because we don’t want to be mean. If you see setting boundaries as mean or rude, you will be sad after setting one. It’s essential to reframe the way you think about this process. Here are a few ways to reframe: Boundaries are a way of advocating for yourself. Boundaries are a way to maintain the health and integrity of a relationship. Boundaries are an excellent way of saying “Hey, I like you so much. I want us to work on a few things.” Boundaries are a way of saying “I love myself.” Reconsider the language you use to describe setting boundaries. Betrayal Don’t betray yourself to please others. Setting boundaries is not a betrayal of your family, friends, partner, work, or anyone or anything else. Not setting them, however, is a betrayal of yourself. Don’t betray yourself to please others. Changing the way you think about setting limits helps manage the discomfort associated with setting them. Remorse “Did I say that? Oh my gosh that came out wrong.” It’s natural to feel like you didn’t do the right thing. When we set boundaries, this happens because we think we’re doing something wrong. But it isn’t wrong or bad to set them. Reframe the way you think about setting boundaries, and that mental shift will help you minimize discomfort. — In this chapter, we talked about all the things that get in the way of your setting boundaries—the feelings, thoughts, and limitations you put on yourself and others. This process will become more natural to you when you get into the rhythm of consistently setting them. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. How were boundaries taught in your family? Did your parents/caregivers honor your boundaries? If so, in what ways? How were your boundaries dishonored? When did you realize that setting them was an issue for you? What’s your biggest challenge with setting them? In the next chapter, we’ll discuss the six types of boundaries. These six types can be applied to multiple areas of your life. Knowing the types of boundaries will help you dig deeper into how to implement them in various areas.