11 Romantic Relationships We don’t naturally fall into perfect relationships; we create them. Malcolm and Nicole had been dating for a year before they decided to move in together. Then, after living together for two years, they found themselves constantly arguing about household duties, how much time they spent together, and the future of their relationship. Often during arguments, Malcolm would get so upset that he’d leave the house for hours. And when he returned, he’d spend the next few days giving Nicole the cold shoulder. In our sessions, Nicole cried about their poor communication. She knew that she and Malcolm loved each other deeply, but she couldn’t figure out why they argued so much. Meanwhile, Malcolm described Nicole as “a nag.” Instead of directly saying what she wanted, she was known to hint about her needs in a not-so-subtle way. This annoyed Malcolm. When irritated, he would ignore her passive-aggressive requests. Nicole’s most significant issue was that she wanted to be married. She never expected to live with Malcolm for two years without at least becoming engaged. She had become resentful, and during arguments she frequently brought up the marriage issue. Malcolm, on the other hand, wasn’t sure if he wanted to be married. It wasn’t until they’d lived together for six months that Nicole started to talk about it. Malcolm shrugged off her concerns in a way that never resolved their issues. It was clear that these two needed help getting to the root of their problems and talking through the communication issues they commonly faced during disagreements. They thought I would referee their disputes about who was right or who should change, but to their surprise, we talked about the agreements they made with each other early in the relationship. Beyond “I love you; you love me,” Malcolm and Nicole had never talked about what each considered acceptable behavior in the relationship. Hence, Malcolm walked out during arguments. They hadn’t discussed each person’s expectations. Yet Nicole wanted to be married, while Malcolm was unsure. For three years, they existed with unspoken boundaries and anger about violations that were unknown to the other person. It was clear to me from the beginning that the couple had boundary issues in their relationship. Back to Basics In Chapter 1, I wrote about signs that you need healthier boundaries. In this case, Nicole was resentful, and her resentment was starting to make itself known in the couple’s daily interactions. Instead of communicating her needs clearly and directly, she often expressed her needs in a passive-aggressive way. She’d say, for example, “When you get back from your mom’s house, I hope you have time to cook dinner like you said you would.” If she was assertive, she might say something like “Be home by five o’clock so you can cook dinner for us, or grab something while you’re out.” Communicating her need would likely prevent an argument, but instead she set up a scenario that routinely ended in an argument. In Chapter 2, we talked about what happens when we don’t set boundaries. Nicole was burned out, so she’d say things like “I’m tired of being the one to ____” and “I’m always considering what Malcolm wants.” She felt as though she was giving a lot and getting very little in return. Malcolm wanted peace, and when his peace was disrupted by intense arguments, he set a boundary by leaving the house. In Chapter 3, we addressed what holds people back from setting boundaries. Nicole didn’t want to feel guilty for being direct about what she wanted. Also, she feared that Malcolm would be unwilling to honor her requests. Since they didn’t talk issues through, however, the couple couldn’t know if getting married was an option for their relationship. In Chapter 6, we detailed ways to identify and communicate boundaries. By helping Nicole and Malcolm communicate theirs, we gave the relationship a reasonable chance of continuing on a healthy path. As we talked through their needs, we came to the following conclusions: Nicole’s Needs A clear understanding of the future of the relationship with the hope of one day getting married; domestic support Malcolm’s Needs Improve how issues are identified, and address them with more meaningful communication instead of explosive disputes — First, I helped Nicole state what she wanted clearly in a way that Malcolm could understand. To her surprise, Malcolm heard her and said he would immediately honor direct requests for more support at home. We spoke about direct ways to ask for assistance, such as “I need your help with ____.” “Be home by five o’clock, because I’d like us to have dinner together.” “I scheduled a date night for us to spend some time together.” When they made clear requests, the couple noticed a reduction in the frequency and intensity of their arguments. For the BIG conversation about marriage, Malcolm admitted to having anxiety about it because of his parents’ dysfunctional relationship and other marriages he’d witnessed. They began to talk through issues and barriers, and they compromised with a new set of agreements for their relationship. Relationship Agreements In every relationship, we operate based on an explicit or implicit set of agreements (rules and boundaries). Based on our agreements, our relationships vary from person to person. In one relationship, we may find ourselves more argumentative; and in others, arguing isn’t an acceptable practice. It isn’t acceptable because at some point, an explicit or implicit agreement was made that it would be inappropriate in that relationship. For example, you might have such a spoken or unspoken agreement about arguments with your boss. Examples of Explicit Agreements with Healthy Boundaries “Don’t raise your voice at me.” “I want an open relationship, where we discuss other partners with each other.” “I want to meet your friends.” Examples of Implicit Agreements with Unhealthy Boundaries You assume that people know how to conduct themselves in a relationship with you. You assume that people will meet your needs without your telling them what those needs are. You assume that people automatically know your expectations. Instead, let’s assume that people know only what you tell them, honor only what you request, and can’t read your mind. Mindful Relationship Habits Define what it means to be in healthy relationships. Assess why you’re in relationships with certain people. Notice your energy while engaging with people. Do what feels right for you. Make peace with not having a relationship that everyone agrees with. Challenge societal norms about what relationships should look like. Discover what makes you happy in your relationships. Honor your feelings by making healthy choices. Setting Expectations Set expectations at any point in your relationship, but the sooner, the better. If you want to be married, it’s essential to know if the person you’re dating also wants to be married. If you don’t want to have kids, it’s necessary to know if the person you’re dating wants to have kids. From this space of clear knowing, you can create intentional agreements in your relationships that provide clarity. It’s fun at the beginning of a relationship, and we often seem easy to please. But the most pleasing thing you can do is be honest with yourself and the person you’re dating. Also, to save yourself time and a lot of heartaches, believe people when they say things like “I don’t want a serious relationship,” “I don’t think I’m the marrying type,” “All my exes said I was crazy,” or “I can’t see myself with a kid.” If you’re okay with these statements, you may be equally matched. But if you want the opposite, find someone else who wants the same things. Otherwise, you’ll spend most of the relationship trying to persuade the other person to want what you want. Rarely does someone change their mind to appease another person, at least not for long. After a few dates with someone, it’s an excellent time to start talking about your expectations. The biggest fear about being honest is that you might scare people away. But this is true only if they aren’t interested in what you present. Therefore, as much as it might hurt, scaring them off is a sign that you’re mismatched. At the beginning of a relationship, it’s vital to know What is the plan for the relationship? Do you have similar values? Are there any issues that are deal-breakers? How will you handle disputes? What is acceptable within the relationship? What unique rules do you want to implement for the relationship? If you’re deep into a relationship where boundaries weren’t discussed up front, get clear about them now, and communicate them to your partner. Based on your feelings about specific issues that have come up between you, you’ll know what areas you need limits in. Watch for resentment, burnout, frustration, settling, uneasiness, and anger. These emotions will guide you directly to where boundaries are needed in your relationship. Poor Communication Is the Leading Cause of Divorce and Breakups I’ve been treating couples as a relationship therapist for fourteen years. The number one reason couples seek therapy is to improve their communication. In fact, I would argue that most relationship issues boil down to communication. If you Google “books for couples,” most of the books will be on this subject. In my years of helping couples, I’m astonished by how often they operate without first discussing the rules of engagement, including what can and can’t happen in the relationship. I’m not talking about what has been appropriate in other relationships, but in the current relationship. What is acceptable and unacceptable? Here are some common areas where communication issues arise: Fidelity Is your relationship monogamous? What does monogamy mean? What does cheating look like? What’s the consequence if someone cheats? Finances How will you manage your money in the relationship? Who is responsible for paying which bill? What are your short-term and long-term financial goals? Will you have joint or separate bank and brokerage accounts? Do either or both of you have financial issues? How will you address financial issues if they arise? Household Who is responsible for doing which task? How will tasks be divided so that they don’t fall on one person? How can you work together to meet the needs of your home? Kids Do you want kids? How many kids do you want? What is your parenting style, or what do you think it will be? How will you approach disagreements related to kids? How will you maintain your relationship with your partner once children arrive? Outside Forces How do you handle issues with your partner’s family? What happens when you disagree with how your partner handled an issue? Is it okay to talk about your relationship with people outside the relationship? If so, whom? How do you protect your relationship from others? Having uncomfortable conversations can save relationships. Not only is it important to communicate more, but it’s also important what you communicate about. Having uncomfortable conversations can save relationships. So be willing to talk about issues before they become a problem. Preventing the common communication mishaps above will save you from arguments in the future. Assertiveness Minimizes Miscommunication and Recurring Arguments Speaking up is hard, especially if your underlying belief is They won’t care. They won’t honor my request. They won’t take me seriously. They won’t understand me. It won’t help anything. I don’t want to be mean. In healthy relationships, communicating your needs is welcomed and respected. In unhealthy relationships, people ignore you, push back, or even challenge your boundaries. We’ve already explored what to do if your relationship isn’t healthy. So let’s assume that your lack of assertiveness is based on fear. In my sessions with couples, I’ve been surprised how much they hold back from each other because they fear what the other person might say. Janice and Sarah sought therapy because Janice wanted more sex. When I asked the couple, “How often would you like to have sex?” they both said the same thing: “Two to three times a week.” This happens so often. Why? Because instead of finding a solution, most couples quarrel about the problem. Instead of stating, “I’d like to have sex two to three times a week,” then following that statement up with initiating sex, most couples resort to arguing. “We never have sex,” they say. Being assertive sets an expectation for your partner. You’re no longer simply reacting to every problem; you’re proactive about the issues in your relationship. When you’re faced with a challenge in your relationship, ask yourself: What is the real problem? What is my need? How do I need to communicate with my partner? What can I do to ensure that my need is met? What do I want from my partner to meet my needs? Creating an Environment for Open Communication Open communication is a way of holding space to address issues that impact the health of your relationship or the people within it. But open communication doesn’t mean that you can be mean or vent to your partner about everything you dislike. For example, you can’t say things like “I hate your mother” and consider that “open.” However, you might say, “I’d like to improve my relationship with your mother because I notice it’s strained. Do you have any suggestions on how to do that?” It’s helpful, of course, to establish healthy communication in the beginning, but if you’re already in a relationship, it’s essential to talk about it now. Open communication works best when done proactively before a small issue becomes a big problem. Little things can easily add up, so address issues even when you believe them to be “not that big of a deal.” You’ll be surprised at the “little things” that later come up as major issues, such as “He takes his shoes off and leaves them right in the middle of the floor.” “She never asks what I want for dinner.” “He never takes my car to the shop. I have to do everything.” Telling your partner what you need allows them to honor your boundary. Staying quiet will piss you off. Here are some examples and solutions for common boundary violations in romantic relationships: “I hate my mother-in-law. My husband won’t stand up to her. What can I do?” It may be hard to watch your husband be taken advantage of by his mother. However, they’ve likely had this dynamic his entire life. You can’t make people aware of what they can’t see. You might be able to get your husband to talk more about their relationship and gently suggest small solutions for him, but the issue with your mother-in-law won’t be resolved overnight. It will take time and patience on your part. As for your relationship with your mother-in-law, you can create whatever boundaries you want. My only caution is to be careful not to bad-mouth your in-laws in front of your partner when you feel frustrated. Whatever issues you’re having, you don’t want to taint your partner’s relationship with their parents. When possible, have your husband address issues with his mother directly—and not by saying, “My wife said ____.” Instead, use “we” language, such as “We think ____.” Using “we” language will make it appear to be a joint decision instead of something that comes from only one person. “My partner is always late for everything.” If your boundary has been stated and not honored, you must change your behavior to promote peace. Here are some possible options: Drive separately. Get comfortable with being late. Give your partner warnings. Accept that you’re with someone who is habitually late. “My partner loans money to family members, and I hate it.” Not loaning people money may be your rule, but not your partner’s. Here are a few options for resolving the issue: If your partner is using your joint accounts, you can set a rule about using only discretionary funds to help others. If a particular person habitually borrows, set some guidelines. Discuss the short- and long-term impact that loaning money has on your household. Talk about other ways the funds could be useful. Difficult Periods in a Long-Term Romantic Relationship In most marriages, people report a decline in satisfaction during the first year, soon after kids are born, and when the kids leave home. The First Year For many couples, learning how to coexist has its challenges, whether emotionally, from sharing the same physical space, and/or from dealing with finances. They spend the first year of marriage acclimating themselves to extended family and their many new roles and experiences. When working with newly married couples, I notice the following three issues: Learning how to navigate personal time, along with work and other life roles Distributing household tasks and responsibilities Managing expectations and relationships with extended family The first year is about learning to build a life together. During this time, it’s essential to be clear about your individual boundaries as well as your common ones. For example: What do you need? What do the two of you need as a couple? Both sets of boundaries are equally important. Many couples experience hardships in the first year simply because they haven’t clearly defined their limits and expectations. Co-Parenting When you put two parents together, you get two different parenting philosophies. Rarely (actually, I’ve never seen it, but I’m hopeful) do parents agree on everything. Many couples go into parenting with the assumption that their partner will know what they need and will meet these unspoken needs. When I was a guest on the Whole Mamas podcast, host Stephanie Greunke spoke about wanting to be able to prepare dinner with minimal interruptions. She expected her husband to read the situation and jump in to help. It never occurred to her to say, “While I’m preparing dinner, please take the kids upstairs and keep them engaged so that I can quickly get through the process.” Instead, she suffered in silence, which, inevitably, created resentfulness. When couples become parents, their relationship is less romantic, and they become more distant and businesslike with each other as they attend to their kids. Mundane basics like keeping kids fed, bathed, and clothed take energy, time, and resolve. In an effort to keep the family running smoothly, parents discuss carpool pickups and grocery runs instead of sharing worldviews or their thoughts on presidential elections. Questions about their day are replaced with questions about whether the diaper looks full. These changes can be more profound than people realize. Fundamental identities may shift from wife to mother or from lovers to parents. Beyond sexual intimacy, new parents tend to stop saying and doing the little things that please their spouses. Flirty texts are replaced with messages that read like a grocery receipt. Before having children, it’s essential to communicate the importance of maintaining the integrity of romance in your relationship. After children arrive, remember to focus on the partnership consciously. This isn’t easy when kids have needs that seem more important than date night, but children benefit greatly from parents with a healthy relationship. With that in mind, make the marriage a priority. Boundaries That Are Important for Parents Having consistent date nights Scouting repeatable babysitters for personal and couple time Asking for help from family Assigning kids a bedtime Prioritizing time to talk about topics other than the kids The Empty Nest When children leave home, parents who have built their identity around parenting may find it challenging to adjust to an empty nest. It can be particularly difficult to shift the focus back to the romantic partnership. But having kids isn’t a reason to abandon yourself and your marriage. When you become a parent, you add kids to your life. You don’t give up your life to parent children. If porous or rigid boundaries prohibited you from having a healthy partnership, set healthy boundaries now. Commit to getting to know your spouse again, date each other, and spend time together. You can’t re-create what you had before, but you can create something new. The Curse of Poor Communication As I said, the biggest issue with most romantic relationships is poor communication. If people could learn to communicate what they want earlier in the dating process, many relationships would be happier. A failure to communicate is a missed opportunity to have your needs met. The number one reason that people fail to communicate their needs is the fear of being seen as mean or needy. But it’s okay to have needs, and it’s reasonable to think that your partner would be willing to meet most of your needs. So state them early, because resentment leads to breakups and divorce. Needs Within Reason That said, it isn’t the responsibility of one person to fulfill every need you have. For instance, if your partner tends to offer you advice when you just want someone to listen, it may be more helpful to share with a friend. We can’t change people or convince them to be different from the core of who they are, and some needs may feel to your partner like an attempt to change them. In your relationships, it’s essential to consider if your request is reasonable. Requests are unreasonable when the other person can’t meet the need. For example, an unreasonable request could sound like “You can never bring up the past.” A reasonable request might sound like “If you bring up the past, I will verbalize that you’re crossing a boundary, and I will redirect the conversation.” Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. If you’re single, ask yourself: What are my top five needs in a relationship? When will I communicate my boundaries? How will I naturally communicate them? What issues will be hardest for me to set boundaries for? How would I like a potential partner to receive my boundaries? If you’re in a relationship, ask yourself: What are my top five needs in my relationship? Is my partner aware of my needs? What is the biggest issue in my relationship? Have I set any boundaries with my partner? Am I honoring the boundaries I set with my partner? In what new ways can I share my boundaries with my partner?