2 Heal Not everything that is faced can be changed, but nothing can be changed until it is faced. —J AMES B ALDWIN, “As Much Truth as One Can Bear” I WORKED FOR A LITTLE WHILE WITH A MOTHER WHOSE SON had been killed in an encounter with police. In the years that followed, she’d been brought into political organizations working against violence, asked to tell and retell her story. She had become a tireless activist, attending meetings and leading marches. It gave meaning to what she’d been through, a way to act when it seemed like life itself had betrayed her. But she’d begun to fray. The same people who had brought her in now found her hard to be around, testy, rigid. Her productivity had become the perfect place to hide the worst of her pain. Whenever I heard stories of brutal loss like hers or saw mothers and fathers and girlfriends stand and speak at press conferences, I always wondered who held them that night, or the next, when the wave of grief came. Who listened when they were messy, or when their story was incoherent? Without that kind of support, I knew that trauma could metastasize into a way of being. Initially, the mother was reluctant to see me. The first time she sat down, her eyes fixed on my face, she pointed a finger and said, “It’s not that I don’t think I need this. It’s that if I really get into this, I know I’ll fall apart. And there’ll be no coming back together.” My stomach dropped. I didn’t have any answers or promises that working together would ease her loss, or that allowing herself to feel and processing what she felt would create any immediate relief, but I did know that if she didn’t do something—that is, if she wasn’t given the space to not do anything but just be—the grip of her pain would only get tighter. Over time, she opened up to me and I stayed close as she shared, turned my body toward her as she described the unthinkable. Through the years, I’ve learned that, more than anything, presence is a kind of permission for honesty. My work is not to imagine that I can bear the weight that someone else holds but a commitment to not look away. I was there, ready to bear witness to the wave of her grief, a reminder, I hoped, that there was life for her still on the shore. Recently, I was speaking on a panel about the state of social justice movements in California. It was a room full of political strategists and veteran community organizers, and I was doing my best to make a case to them for why healing and personal transformation are necessary for social change. At the end of the talk, during the question-and-answer session, an older man stepped to the mic and said, “We can’t heal our way out of fascism or climate change. We’ve got more important things to do.” A few people let out uncomfortable laughs, presumably in agreement, and everyone turned to look at our panel at the front of the room. A part of me deflated. I’d used my ten minutes trying to present what I thought would be well received, the science of trauma and healing, redefining both in ways that expanded their reach, from their impact on the individual and the collective to the importance of embodied healing, but I knew it was a hard pitch for a room that didn’t take feeling as seriously as they took what they saw as political threat. There was a time when I had felt the same way. That in order to be serious about social change, I couldn’t feel. That I had to hide even from myself what haunted me. Never mind getting support to heal or even telling anyone what troubled me. I soon learned that everything that mattered was happening outside of me, that my only focus should be the meetings I went to and how many doors I knocked on. But it got to a point where no amount of making myself useful could quiet what I felt inside. I decided to go to therapy. This was around 2006, long before there was a public conversation about Black mental health, when there was still so much stigma against getting support. Every Tuesday at 1:45 P.M., as I walked to my appointment, my mom would call like clockwork for her daily check-in. And every time she called, I would tell her I was on my way to therapy, and she’d ask with worry, “What’s wrong?!” “Nothing specific,” I would say. “Remember? I go every week.” To her, and likely others of her generation, therapy was reserved for emergencies, for breaking points, for when numbing or distraction was no longer enough to get you through the day. The kind that looked back or looked in, dredging up what you had been convinced was yours to endure, was never a voluntary undertaking. It was assumed to do more harm than good. Somewhere around that same time, I sat down to dinner with a friend of mine, a seasoned political organizer, and shared that I’d been increasingly interested in understanding trauma. I confessed that I’d started weekly and, up to that point, secret therapy sessions that were helping me understand places where the past had taken hold of me and not let go. That I thought knowing what was possible in the human mind and body added new dimensions to political work. That I could feel there was something in this that we needed to know to organize well, to care for one another. My friend rolled her eyes and sat back in her chair. “Are you becoming one of those people?” she said. “Soft and always talking about your feelings?” Tears rushed the back of my eyes, but I held them in. It crushed me, this message that healing was not for us. What was I ultimately fighting for if not a world where I could sometimes be soft? What I offered in response to the man at the podium that night, what I was too hurt and confused to say to my friend years before, is what I’ll offer to you now: Healing and social change are not, in fact, unrelated. To pry them apart is to exacerbate the issue. They are inextricably linked, braided together, interdependent processes of transformation. To ask if we can heal at the same time that we engage social change is, to me, like asking if we can love at the same time we make change, if we can make music or eat food. How could our personal development ever truly be at odds with social transformation? How could it happen without it? And yet, this was the way so many of us thought. How did we get here? In other moments of Black freedom movements, the spiritual, cultural, and emotional elements of our lives were held by institutions that tended to our development as well as our connection with the transcendent. Churches were one such place, and before that the African traditions brought with us in the belly of ships shaped us similarly. At different times since then, Black people have been punished, as have Indigenous people, for practicing their spiritualities. More recently, many of our churches seem to have gone wayward, preoccupied more with appearance and wealth than the interior development of their people. As congregations have left in droves, an unforeseen casualty is the understanding that our internal worlds, our flourishing as people, have bearing on the material worlds we inhabit and create. Healing, or care, is still essential for guiding the how of what we build, the visions for the world, and is the principle for how we navigate the challenges therein. When we commit to social change, we remember that systems can perpetuate and create harm, or they can foster healing and resilience. This is especially important to know because we can mean well, be committed, have a vision for change that inspires, but if we are not actively and intentionally attending to our own healing or practicing a healing ethic, we unnecessarily limit what it is that we can do. Most of the time, we come to the work of making the world anew because of the pain this one has caused. Our wounds can give us the initial surge to fight back, though this energy is fueled by our most frightened, defended, and adrenalized selves. Ultimately, it’s not sustainable. The wound grows even as we use it, eating away at the person who holds it, acidifying all we do. Every place of contact or relationship bears potential pain, and our strategy can become too protective, rather than tapping into the prospective. We are most powerful when sourcing our energy from possibility, from our visions, not from the pain we know, but from the world just outside of what we can now see. Our energy is most potent when we make room for our grief and anger, when we allow ourselves to feel, and our direction becomes clearer. Over the years, my work has shown me a curious pattern: When social movements and social change organizations face significant external political pressure and backlash, it can turn inward, and they can fracture along the lines of individual and collective unaddressed traumas. They break apart in places where we are replicating patterns that harm others and ourselves. We cannot ignore our wounds, nor can we work over or through them, nor mine them for energy. Instead, it’s through an orientation toward healing and repair for ourselves and others that we recover our capacity for feeling, for relationship, and, with that, the ability to strengthen our bonds and work together. Then we can create and lean in to visions for ourselves and a world beyond our fear. As we attempt to reconfigure the world where it has been unjust and where our systems and beliefs have hurt us, so must we transform ourselves, our values, our cultures, our actions, and our spirits. The grief that poured out of the mother I spoke with that day was heartbreaking, world-shaking, and it deserved space and witness. If we were to feel our pain out in the open, name it, step into the ceremony of it, and let the knowledge guide our steps, how might that change every single thing we do? How might it change the world? “TRAUMA” IS A WORD WITH its own fraught history that I use simply because it helps me to understand cause and effect, how injuries happen to the human spirit, and how we twist and wind a life around our wounds. Native psychologists like Eduardo Duran 1 have developed the term “soul wounds” to expand our understanding of trauma into spiritual and historical realms. And psychiatrist and Harvard Medical School clinical professor Judith Herman and her work on trauma have helped me to understand the political history of the field itself. In her groundbreaking book Trauma and Recovery, 2 Herman shows that our growing understanding of trauma has always been tied to political frameworks. When Sigmund Freud began studying so-called hysteria in women as part of the anticlerical political movement of late-nineteenth-century France, he found an epidemic of childhood sexual abuse. He halted and hid this research because it was too inflammatory and potentially disruptive to powerful men’s lives. Later, research into the trauma of veterans during the two world wars was more concerned with how quickly soldiers could be returned intact to the front lines than with the true depth and nature of their pain. It was only through anti-war movements led by veterans in the 1960s and their campaign to investigate the traumatic impacts of combat, and through feminist movements in the 1970s and ’80s insisting on unearthing the hidden stories of abuse that women had buried, many since childhood, that trauma as the field we now know began to take shape. Because of these movements we began to understand more about post-traumatic stress: that survivors of domestic abuse can carry the same symptoms as veterans of war, that disabled veterans, women and children, are human and their pain matters and will impact their lives and the lives of their loved ones. We are still shaping how trauma is understood: whose stories are included and whose harm is recognized. Racial justice movements in the last decade have started to talk openly about the trauma of poverty and of oppression, expanding this knowledge and recognizing its far-reaching effects. The mother I worked with taught me something that I had often felt but hadn’t seen before in any textbook: that Black bodies carry the weight of generations of trauma while continuing to experience traumas every day, and that too often we hold it silently. What has happened to us and our ancestors—the legacy of enslavement, Jim Crow, lynchings, segregation and desegregation, mass incarceration, and the onslaught of crack—is still here in the air and still here in our tissues, and despite what we might think or how we’ve been trained, that matters. Trauma researcher and author Bessel van der Kolk has highlighted 3 how trauma, originally thought of as a psychological phenomenon, is in fact physiological, experienced in and throughout the body. When we encounter a threat, whether assault, neglect, or ridicule, our bodies want to save our lives and mobilize our varied resources—from the dispersal of hormones to the readying of our muscles—so that we can take the necessary and appropriate action. This uptick in energy and the activation of our survival strategies are ancestral genius at play. Over the development of life on earth, our microbial, animal, and human ancestors faced a great number of threats and learned, in fortunate moments, how to elude death, destruction, and isolation from their communities. These lessons were then encoded in their brains and throughout the rest of their bodies and passed down to us, making it easy for us to respond to threats quickly without too much thinking and to relay critical information from our bodies to our brains and vice versa. These necessary responses are a part of our everyday interactions with one another and our environment. However, when what we face overwhelms our ability to respond and/or to escape unscathed, or when we are given the message to suppress the body’s reactions, our nervous systems don’t know that the traumatic experience has ended, and our survival response continues to exist in our bodies. We live then in a near-constant state of reaction, either scanning for an indication that the threat has returned or reproducing aspects of the experience in our relationships and lives in what many understand to be an attempt to complete the threat we feel. It is alive in our tissues, our muscles, our thoughts, and our moods. It lives on in our behavioral patterns, our habits, what we do and don’t do, what we say and what we are afraid to say. I explain to my clients that trauma can arrest a part of you, that you can have a region of your body living out of time, out of step, with the rest of you. That a physiological memory from ten or twenty years earlier can be lodged in the structure of your fasciae, and therefore in your actions and relationships. This is what we mean when we say that trauma stays, that it lingers long past its welcome in our bodies. When we don’t attend to trauma, it can start to permeate our lives. While we may know that the initial pain can hold our bodies hostage, we often overlook that it refuses to stay within the confines of our singular bodies, that it moves through relationships, within our families, our communities, and across society, multiplying the pain. Intergenerational trauma can pass down, sometimes epigenetically, by our inherited genes, and most clearly through the ways our families interact. How are boundaries set? Are people humiliated or threatened? What gets talked about, and what goes unsaid? How is love shown, and to whom? Complex trauma, first introduced 4 by Judith Herman, reveals that trauma, once thought of as a single catastrophic event, can be a repetitive or ongoing accumulation of threats to our survival, such as neglect or emotional or physical abuse, leaving the body on constant alert. I know much of this from my own childhood. My parents were both, in their own ways, beautiful. Intensely loving and love starved. Our home was both warm and, to me, randomly volatile. The fear was there every day, even if the violence wasn’t. I knew love in the nuzzle of my dad’s beard and in the warmth and softness of my mother. But their fights were unpredictable and sometimes violent, so I learned about vigilance and dissociation, how to be here one moment and gone the next. It wasn’t safe to be out in the open. In my first memory of life, I am four or maybe five, in the bedroom that I share with my sister. The slatted doors open to our living room, and on the other side of them is a storm. My father is a dark cloud descending on my mother, lightning bolts and thunderous growls, and she is falling. Her dress flaps open and I see bruises, deep purples and blues. At some point a beer bottle is broken and from the way it amplifies the horror in my recollection, it is broken over her. My sister, who is probably twelve years old, must have pulled me away because I’m no longer standing there, I’m facing another wall and she is holding me. We are an island in this storm. If we can hold each other through, we may survive. It is not our bodies that we are protecting but something much more core and unnameable. I don’t remember and neither does she if we are shaking or crying or still, but it is terror that is coursing through me, and everything in me, barely even formed, is already shattered. For a long time, this memory was a part of a montage of frightening moments I recalled, moments where the world showed me something I didn’t yet know was possible. That the people you loved the most could be caught in a violent tangle. For years, this scene replayed in my mind, not only in moments of fear but, surprisingly, also in moments of intimacy. Your mother, your safe harbor, could be hurt, and your father who tickled and hugged you, with those same hands, could abuse. It was shocking, being catapulted to a dangerous place and trying to understand: Can I be safe in this new world? Later, during my training as a therapist and somatic practitioner, I consciously learned what my body had already known. That trauma breaks apart our ability to experience safety, belonging, and dignity. That these needs are core to our ability to develop as human beings, grow, create, engage with others and the world, and express and protect ourselves. Safety is the capacity to feel free from threat, which includes the threat of hunger and neglect. When we feel safe, our nervous systems can quiet, allowing for other capacities like imagination and expression to come forward. Belonging, similarly, is our ability to feel that we are a part of something, of a community and the world around us. Trauma can make belonging contingent or dangerous, leading us to seek isolation or supremacy—both strategies to break belonging. Dignity is the capacity to feel the inherent value simply in the fact that we exist. It is the seat of agency, of choice. When we can witness and tolerate dignity in others, we build a foundation for collaboration, for co-creation, and repair. When dignity breaks apart, a space opens up where shame comes in, telling us stories of our inherent worthlessness. Even when our conditions change, we can still struggle internally to feel or believe that these capacities are possible for us: We may never feel safe even though we have what we need; we may question belonging even when we are clearly wanted; we may live with a persistent shame that doesn’t allow for boundaries or choices that care for us. It’s the fracturing of these capacities that follows us through our lives. When I was a child, my nervous system learned to constantly search for threat even when there was none. A pervasive shame held me together, mediating at all times who I could be to belong. I was somehow at fault for the abuse, at fault for my mother’s unhappiness. I was fundamentally bad. I was also left with a belief that belonging was innately dangerous—better to hide my own needs so deep that they would be almost imperceptible even to me. I carried this embodied trauma forward into all my relationships, hiding from the possibility of connection. TO HEAR MY FATHER TELL IT, my grandfather was the best dad in the world. He was superhuman: a military man, a skilled tradesman, and a ladies’ man, too. My dad had only a few stories he told, and they were of his father’s accomplishments, not about any adventures they went on or lessons he learned firsthand. I asked my mother about it one day, why there was such a gap between my grandfather the myth and the man, why there was hardly anything in those stories that gave me a feel for his voice or his way. I must have sensed somehow that my father couldn’t withstand this line of questioning. The story my mother knew and had heard from my grandmother was that my dad never saw his father. That he was abandoned by him. My grandfather was known to call and promise my young dad a visit and then leave him waiting all day on the steps with a backpack of his most precious things. This image broke my heart. And I could see in it how a child who longed for a father who never came would need to break with parts of reality, would still need, as a man, what he had missed as a child, to be the center of someone’s world, to be loved. My dad always maintained the story of a perfect father because that imagined father could somehow follow through on his promises. To that imagined father, my dad was lovable. My dad didn’t know that his father had likely been in his own pain that siphoned off his supply of love, nor did he know that his own childhood hurt was the basis for his violence and rage. That his trauma rippled down to us. In my sixteenth year, I was sexually assaulted twice, both times by boys I considered my friends. I know very clearly that none of it was my fault, but I also know that I had gotten accustomed to having my body too close to the fire, to the rage of my father. I befriended boys with tempers that I tried to quell, who took more than they gave, because it was familiar to me. I had learned to seek connection at the expense of my bodily safety, to lose my own limits in order to belong. Eventually, transgression became familiar, a fact of relationship. I learned to quiet my body’s responses, a wince, the desire to pull away. I could numb my own indicators that I’d had enough. The abuse my father acted out on us was a predictor and a preparation for other violations. Trauma spreads and transmits beyond our individual bodies. We are social, interdependent beings, communicating almost constantly with one another about how safe we are, how threatening, how willing we are to connect, and how likely we are to leave. So when our past invades our present, as is the way with trauma, we inhabit our current relationships according to the concerns, fears, pain from another time. When we talk of intergenerational trauma, this is a part of what we mean. It can be passed down in those earliest and most intimate relationships. My dad’s unresolved pain from his own childhood, and the trauma of his father that preceded him, became a feature, an organizing principle, of my relationship with him, and it warped itself into a trauma that lived on in me. PAIN IS TRANSMITTED ACROSS A power grid. It’s sent to the places where we don’t fear the consequences of it spilling over onto the people less powerful than us, onto seemingly less deserving bodies. It shows up as abuse toward a partner who has fewer means to leave or in the scapegoating of whole communities for our suffering. My father grew up a well-known, academically gifted, and charming football player in a small Texas town. Outside of the context of Southern racism, born in another time, he might have seemed destined for the kind of fame or power given to his white counterparts with similar attributes. But, as they say, to be Black means that you have to be twice as good and most of the time even that isn’t enough. The pain and frustration my father felt were palpable in the home, the deep internal breaks of missing his own father who never showed up, but also the broken promises of this country to Black men. He felt he deserved a different future, as a man, and if he had a bad day at work, was laid off, or otherwise felt the blunt end of racism, it wasn’t his boss who suffered the rage of his dehumanization, it was us—his family, those who had less power and recourse than he did, my mother first and then the children. Sending pain down the ladders of power, illuminated in the work of writer Sonya Renee Taylor, 5 somehow reinforces the hierarchy itself, cementing the belief that some are deserving of violence. While my mother could pass some of her pain on to me, on the whole we were all left to internalize it and make believe that we had earned it. To think otherwise was a threat to order. The dance of patriarchy, racism, and aching poverty trapped my dad in this cycle. As far as he could see, he would always be scrambling for resources, yet always feel responsible to provide. He was told that having feelings was feminine, that he couldn’t feel the sadness, despair, longing of his child self and stay a man. Against this backdrop, rage made him into someone, contoured him against love, reinforced, even though it was fleeting, that he could be powerful in this world. Oppression is the distribution and concentration of trauma into bodies and communities designated less powerful. It is the mechanism that leaves these same bodies and communities without the resources in time, money, or support to heal. Of course, that’s not to say that trauma doesn’t touch every kind of person. It can and does. It just means that the frequency and force will likely be different. For some, trauma is inflicted by institutions that restrict rights or incarcerate disproportionately, as well as inflicted within their homes. They feel it in the constant stress of underemployment, in bouts of hunger. Some will have more to inherit from what history has handed down. And some will not have the capacity to address the part of it they hold. Whether we thought about it this way or not, my mom and my sister, my brother, and I were suddenly connected to a web of other mothers, partners, and children who had experienced abuse and carried that trauma with us. And we all were part of a Black experience mediated by the trauma of oppression—a threat to our collective safety, belonging, and dignity. It undermines safety by threatening our bodies and narrowing our resources. It withholds belonging in laws and disparate treatment and assaults dignity wherever mythologies of supremacy persist. Such complex and compounded trauma undermines the very idea of community, conveying the notion that it is too dangerous to be together. We can fracture or internalize messages of inferiority to stay safe. These traumas weigh on Black people and communities and, unprocessed, they accumulate and intensify. Together, we have not had a moment of reprieve to grieve what has happened and what has been lost. And we have not at large scale possessed the resources we need to restore our safety, belonging, and dignity. Every person who has experienced trauma interacts with every other person’s trauma. It is a tangle that impacts everything we do. Our struggles extend into our families, friendships, and communities, into our places of work and worship, our organizations, and each person’s trauma becomes entwined and interconnected with everyone else’s. Even when we see this matrix of pain and intend to relieve it, what already lives in us undermines what we are able to do. Is it any wonder that the changes we try to bring to our communities, to the world, the things we try to build, sometimes splinter? MANY SOCIAL JUSTICE MOVEMENTS, whether stated explicitly or not, are, in part, an effort to heal. People are drawn to them, looking for an end to the same unfair treatment and perpetual trauma experienced in their personal lives. It was a part of what pulled me in. I felt for the first time that what I experienced growing up wasn’t something to hide; it was important information about the world as it is. And it seemed like the only place where that firsthand knowledge was taken seriously. Even if there wasn’t space there to process or feel it, there were solutions being offered, ways to prevent or at least interrupt other similar occurrences. And, in a way, that’s one of the powers of social movements: We are bringing to them what matters most to us. In this way, they can be places for our deep healing, but if we are unconscious of what we are doing and why, they can just as easily become places that trigger our trauma and further separate safety, belonging, and dignity. If it is our pain that fuels us more than our visions, we can’t last. I have seen the lingering impacts of trauma in people’s personal lives show up elsewhere in their organizations and institutions, fracturing the foundation of collaboration and undermining our ability to do powerful things. I’ve seen leaders so afraid to trust that they move in secrecy or try too hard to hold on to control. They struggle to build strong, connected teams. I’ve seen others so terrified of belonging that they frustrate or sabotage the work with their constant suspicion. And there are those who use overwork as a way not to feel, and who expect others to do the same. A brilliant leader I once worked with flew into a rage and flung a chair across a room when given some necessary but hard feedback. The vestiges of childhood trauma broke through, undermining my colleague’s ability to stay calm, causing them to put others down, to protect themselves, no matter the harmful fallout. Months of building trust and connection, hundreds of hours of late nights and missed family time, exploded in that one moment as the chair went across the room. It was devastating for everyone. Whoever we are, we pour our stuff into our work. We bring our habits, our coping mechanisms, behaviors, and patterns to whatever it is we do, and that becomes the basis of the cultures we build. When we focus on external change without tending to internal transformation, we act out the worst of ourselves in the places where it matters most. We are left in a reactive state. We answer the moment based on past scripts and experiences rooted in our bodies, and we throw out short-term, shortsighted, narrow-minded reactions instead of the long-term, collaborative, transformative solutions we need to bring positive change to the world. THE MASSIVE SCOPE AND SCALE of trauma with its intertwined and compounding paths could easily overwhelm us. What’s the point of looking closely at something that is everywhere? But by viewing trauma as a teaching tool and a frame for understanding individual distress and social challenges, we can learn from it. It shows us what is too much for a human body to bear before breaking, what it takes to disarm our defenses, which societal structures increase despair, and how we might organize ourselves as a society to optimize individual and collective well-being. This way of examining trauma tells us what it takes to really heal. For a long time, I searched for a definition of healing. Most times, what I came across in the world of psychology was the treatment of symptoms, not the root cause, or healing as defined by the ability to get back in the saddle and become a more productive citizen. In other circles, healing was an escape, a disengagement from life, high-end retreats and self-care classes where you could pay to temporarily keep the messy problems of the outside world at bay. Most of the time, we define terms according to our context, so it’s not surprising that our terms for healing reflect the destructive individualistic and productivity-oriented tendencies of our society. In my own work, I needed a definition that pointed me in a direction, but that kept me firmly on the ground, that helped me understand what the full scope of healing could be. I’ve been working for years now with this: Healing is the process, often lifelong, of restoring and reawakening the capacities for safety, belonging, and dignity on the other side of trauma. It’s a simple definition but it works for me. We can’t heal or act effectively under active threat, when our safety is not assured. We either find safety or create it with who and what we have. Belonging is about bringing us back into the world around us, and back into relationships with others. Dignity is where we feel our worthiness again, where we are about the business of eradicating shame and expressing our agency and choicefulness. These principles can bring us to a path of our own growth. And I think these principles have social implications. Most of the time mainstream healing and wellness put the pressure on the individual to “heal” when really it’s about fitting into a society that may itself be the source of the trauma. How can we best practice a culture that restores these capacities and build societies with these principles at the center? I recently became a parent. The intimacy that my child came ready for awakened in me some of the places where I was still metabolizing my past. If you’ve never looked into the eyes of a baby, if you’ve never let them take you in, study your face and movements, I suggest this dose of presence. One of the first times my child looked at me that way, I felt myself recoil, afraid of such an intimate connection, a body memory from my own childhood. The shame story followed that wondered if I were good enough to be looked at by her, my child. I felt it happen inside me, a slow-motion retreat, a preoccupation with my own worthiness, and I caught it, adjusted, breathed, and chose to find my way back to her, to meet her in presence, to witness her curiosity, and let myself be witnessed. Just that simple move interrupted the beginning of a transmission of disconnection to my child. That particular trauma, at least in that moment, did not successfully root itself into our relationship and did not stretch into our future. Healing happens in moments as simple and profound as this, when we are able to tolerate, feel, and express something in our relationships that before was out of our reach. It reinstates our abilities to choose something other than what our fear dictates. It will not make us perpetually nice or necessarily peaceful, but it will help to make our responses correlate with what is happening now. Healing, I often say, helps us fight in the places we need to, but love in the places we long to. Healing is not an acclimation to unjust conditions. It isn’t about quieting down or fitting neatly inside what already exists. This brings me to “resilience,” a related word and one I tried for a long time to avoid. Even as I write it now, I can hear the groans from people I know: “Not this word again. I’m tired of being resilient. I want to thrive.” I feel it, but there are a few reasons why I think it’s important. Around 2019, I co-founded a collective called Resilient Strategies. We wanted to understand trauma and how resilience strengthened our organizational cultures. We found that resilience isn’t a label someone can give you. Black people, in particular, have been told how resilient we are for surviving some of the worst kinds of abuse. But survival does not necessarily ensure resilience. One of our elders, Alta Starr, would say that instead of thinking about resilience as the way we cope after trauma, we should think of it as our birthright, how we come into this world. To be resilient is to be engaged, creative, adaptive, and relational. It’s to remember that you are a part of this world. It is the opposite of isolation and habitual protection. We find it in dance at the moment we sync up with the beat or when we witness someone else finding in themselves the doorway to the ecstatic. It’s there in what we call nature when we can feel as if we belong to that larger system. It’s in everything that rightsizes you, brings you into reverence and presence, where you leave your control or hiding place, and suddenly you can create within the world, and be taken aback in awe of it, too. Resilience is found in the most transformative of healing journeys. Healing is not a place you can arrive to. And whatever you call it, it is the ongoing work of enlivening our interiors, waking up our souls. Healing is an orientation to living rather than a destination. It is a commitment to mending and developing our emotional awareness and integrity. The basis for freedom, for power, is a body where we can be alive and changing, to become people who can relate to one another and the world around us. Our emotional selves are not inconsequential to liberation; they are foundational. Healing is not an easy process. The things that suffocate us and haunt us are persistent and pervasive. Between a rock and a hard place is no place to live. It’s true that there are real limitations to what healing we can do internally and relationally without also changing the pressures that we each face every day. Still, the limits don’t mean that we neglect healing altogether, or that we pretend it isn’t worthwhile. It’s not lost on me that some of us would rather stay in the realm of healing and never face the terrifying and massive questions of how we live more justly in this world together. Others would rather stay focused on justice than come home to face whatever unresolved tension or pain they carry. We commit to our own healing in part because the realization of what we are dreaming of rests on it. It is our responsibility to one another to do our internal work, not so that we feel good alone but to stay an active part of the whole and to refuse to pass down to the next generation what pain we’ve accrued. Healing ourselves is not the end of the line but brings us into relationship with others, and allows us to do the work that brings healing to the wider world. For society and movements, it could mean that safety, belonging, and dignity become our metrics for the well-being of our organizations and the people inside them. We could make room for authentic connection, timely repair, and intentionally build more trust and transparency. We might study the resilient and life-giving aspects of our cultures and practice while being aware of what drains and depletes. We could be careful about how we bring in the most traumatized of us, making sure we scaffold them with care. We could use how we gather together not to numb ourselves from the pain we face, but to build a collective resilience that carries us over the long term. And we could source our work with our visions, not our pain. How we work is as important as the work we do. Some years back, I told myself that I wouldn’t follow anyone whose vision for the future didn’t show up in their day-to-day life in how they cared for themselves and the people around them. Being open to healing makes a leader open for learning and is the basis of a kind of compassion that encourages others to step into the unknown of transformation. When we can heal our trauma, our lives deepen as we widen our capacity to experience more, to perceive more, and to connect more. As we start to feel safe with one another and feel like we belong together, we can relax into appreciating the fullness of life and our place in this ecosystem. And we can bring our transformed and transforming selves to the necessary work of building a better society for everyone. What do we choose to build then? Who or what would our systems protect? What would it do to movements, to our society and culture, to have the principles of healing at the very center? And what does it do to have healing at the center of every structure and everything we create? I think about this often for my family. What if, in another world, survival had not been the order of the day? What if my father had been held as a boy whenever he needed it, or if he’d been asked about his pain? What if my mother had been talked to sweetly so often as a child that she expected the same treatment in every adult relationship and had known how to leave when it was absent? What if a community had surrounded her after she’d been hurt, loved her abundantly, and nursed every wound? What if both my parents had been given options and outlets, if their own family members had sought to repair what they had broken in them? What if the love we felt for one another had been expressed generously, with no sense of scarcity or fear? Or my sister and I had embraced before feeling terror and not because of it? I know that time does not turn back. But what if, I wonder, we were to do it all now? Can healing reach through the weeks, and months, and years, and free us? I believe something comes back to us when we listen to and hold one another and when we take time to learn ourselves and tend to what we find. Through healing we can change both the past and the future.