10 Love at the Center If love will not swing wide the gates, no other power will or can. —J AMES B ALDWIN, The Fire Next Time SOMEHOW IT’S GOTTEN TO BE THAT TO TALK EARNESTLY ABOUT love is to reveal that you are not in fact a serious person concerned with the serious things of the world. Maybe it’s why I’ve left this part for last. Or maybe it’s that love somehow doesn’t force its way to the front of any conversation about change. Not proud, it allows us to overlook it, though it is steadily there at the heart of it all. The first personal commitment I made, my vision, was a commitment to giving and receiving love. It feels a long time ago now, not so much in years as in how that commitment worked its way through my life. When my child was born, my heart changed composition. It became so much wider and softer behind my ribs. Her smile, her presence, remind me every day that love has changed me fundamentally. More, if I’m honest, than any practice or therapy has so far. I see now that courage directs our actions, but it’s love that gives our actions and our lives their meaning. My love for my child prioritizes things in my life. Suddenly, it’s important to say words I’d feared saying before, important that I sort out our generational burdens. It is for her now that I’m so committed to what our culture, systems, and institutions could be, to how they can support and nurture life, to making a society where it is possible for her to flourish, together with those who come after. Years ago in college while smoking a bowl in my dorm room, a friend asked, lost in her own high thoughts, “Hey, what is love anyway?” “What?” I replied, thinking the question was silly, obvious, but stopping short of being able to form the words to answer her. “Love is, you know, a feeling,” I said eventually. “That’s it?” she asked. “What kind of feeling? Is it enough that I feel it over here? How would I get it to you?” I remembered then that nineties song by Haddaway, “What Is Love,” and suggested the answer might be hidden somewhere in it. Those were the days of Napster, so we quickly downloaded it, played it over her speakers, and scoured the lyrics for some insight. Turns out, Haddaway had no more answers than we did. He was only pleading, stumped by the same question, overwhelmed by the power of this thing he could not define. We sat back in silence. After thinking for a while, my friend offered, “Maybe love is when you’re drawn to someone and want them to be close to you?” “Yeah, yeah, that’s it,” I said. “But sometimes we love them even when we know we can’t be together.” I thought it over and came to something that, a decade later, I found out was eerily similar to a phrase landed on by Saint Thomas Aquinas more than seven hundred years earlier: “I think love,” I said, “is when we will another’s existence.” “Mmmm,” my friend said, nodding, and we each fell back into our own worlds and our contemplations of love. Willing another’s existence could happen near or far, across time. It’s not force or control, but a light and steady touch, a presence and attention. The steadiness of love, the will of it, is what gives it weight, distinguishes it from the thin love that Toni Morrison warns 1 about in her novel Beloved. To will someone is a generosity of our own spirit, a shift from scarcity, a faith in connection. Love is a kind of reunification. As my friend pointed out that night, it’s not enough for love to exist only inside of ourselves. It seems to long for gesture, for expression, to be infused into all that we create. Its expression is its power—and this frightens us, too. That night on my friend’s floor, I ran the newly imbued word across the places where I might have experienced and known love in my life, and it showed me things I hadn’t seen before, where love lived, and where I’d only received a paler, thinner version. When I was growing up, there was a kind of love around me. My grandmother had a biting sense of humor and the gift of sight. She could see through you, and some of what she saw were your deepest insecurities. And she hardly ever hesitated to make a joke of what she found. Nothing was off limits. The last time I saw her alive, I attempted to look more feminine, even covering up my tattoos so I wouldn’t upset her religious sensibilities. But as soon as I walked into the room she said, “You’re a tomboy, and you ain’t neva gonna change.” I couldn’t help but laugh. To be seen the way she saw me made me feel oddly secure; I always knew how she felt about me. On that same visit, I heard: “I didn’t used to like you, but now you’re one of my favorites.” I kissed the top of her head, pocketed all the sweetness in what she’d said and left the barbs she wrapped it in. I never questioned her love (though maybe I should have). I only wondered why it could never come out pure, flowing. I knew it was there when she shoved twenty dollars into my palm on my birthday. She didn’t have many twenty-dollar bills, so I tried every year to return them and she would grumpily tell me to stop blocking her blessings and walk away. I knew it when she picked me up on Saturday mornings to go thrift-shopping and we sat in the car afterward, drinking the milkshakes she loved and listening to gospel music like two little kids. I knew it when she’d grab me up in a rough hug and I wondered who she was fighting. Was it her own impulse and desire for closeness and softness? It wasn’t any easier for my grandmother to feel my love than it was for her to express her own. Maybe because of her, my family has a strong bond but struggles to put words or affection to our experience of and need for love. We struggle to let our guards all the way down. As a kid I was always sensitive. I wanted to talk about this love feeling I felt bubble up in me, but like a lot of Black families, we’ve been through things that we’ve never talked about openly, and when you talk about love you open a dangerous door. It stirs up memories of what we have not allowed ourselves to feel fully, and it reminds us that what is precious can be lost. So we bite our tongues rather than sing love’s praises. Yes, we know selflessness and sacrifice whose origins are love, but most of us carry inside the question of whether we are worth the spilling over and the proclamation. Is anybody willing us to be here? Our love practice gets stunted like this. Recently, the scholar and writer Alexis Pauline Gumbs was a guest on my podcast, and I asked her, as I ask all my guests, to describe where we are in this moment, to locate us, to give us some bearing as everything seems to change around us. To my question, she responded, “Well, we are always in the unfolding of love. We are learning how to love as usual.” 2 That answer rang in my chest. Later, in reflection, I understood that love is the greater of what is always happening. And our strife, our disconnection, our disagreement, our denial, and our violence are the tantrums we throw against love’s requirement that we understand, change, and become. I could see that love is always trying to unfold through each of us, but it is on us to dissolve the barriers that prevent us from loving, the barriers present in our own fear, in our ego and our bodies, and the barriers in our systems. We can love ourselves back to one another and back into this ecosystem if we try. Love is never very far if we invite it. When I made my first commitment, that I wanted to be able to give and receive love freely, the first declaration I made toward any kind of change, I remember how my stomach jumped to say it out loud. Something caught in my throat. I wanted it but didn’t know the first thing about living it. I started in the only place I had any real control and that was with myself. I took myself out on dates, doing exactly what it was I enjoyed most. When malicious voices critiqued everything I did or attempted to do, I interrupted them with affirmations. And I sang a lot of love songs to myself out loud in the car. It turns out there are very few love songs that are written for the sole purpose of expressing our love for ourselves. We have countless unconditional love songs for other people, lovers mainly, but most of the songs written about ourselves are regretful, apologetic, or boastful at the other extreme. So I started singing love ballads intended for someone else to myself, envisioning my own face when I sang. Whitney Houston songs were especially well suited for this exercise: “Saving All My Love for You.” “Run to You.” “I Have Nothing.” And of course, “I Will Always Love You.” I don’t sing well, but even that was part of the exercise, that singing them sincerely to myself would make something happen. One night, I caught myself in the rearview mirror and for the first time in forever I saw someone who was not flawed or broken, someone with an awkward beauty, someone who tried. I could see there was nothing to be ashamed about in my mistakes except perhaps how I denied them and tried to cover them up. I was no less or more lovable than my favorite people or anyone else in the world. The confusion that I couldn’t ever be lovable had had a hold on me, an inherited confusion that I saw in the generations before me, that came from a society that ranked people’s worthiness and value and ranked the people I loved the lowest. I saw now that I had always been lovable, and realizing that taught me about the love practice I deserved. Kasha was my friend for many years before anything romantic happened. It wasn’t until the passing of my grandmother, not too long after her grandfather had died, that we fell in love. It surprised us both, that our grief opened up the door for love. On a visit to see her in Hawai’i, she built an altar for my grandmother and her grandfather. They sat next to each other up there, framed and smiling, encircled in leis. She sat just below, and asked me to tell her stories about my grandmother. I was overwhelmed by the beauty of this invitation. Did I deserve to be loved like this? I shared and she listened with a steady presence. She gave me room to feel, and instead of being repelled by my vulnerability, she moved closer. The tears poured and she didn’t rush to wipe them, just put a hand on my back, asked another question, or let the silence wash over us. When it came time for her to tell me stories of her grandfather, she held my hand tight and presented a complicated man, meticulous, reliable, who loved through actions but whose words only began to soften at the end of his life when his body gave way. I didn’t know him but loved him, and caught fragments of the face I saw in his photo mosaicked in hers looking over at me. We were not only falling in love, we were in that unfolding of it; it was already here, a love that had room for generations. At the airport as I was leaving, I said to her, “I wish a love like this for everybody. Imagine what it could do.” A love like this disintegrates the things you have held on to and that have held on to you. When I became a therapist, I remember saying to a friend that it felt like I was getting paid to give someone the unconditional love they deserved. Certainly, there are skills involved other than providing the love that someone needs, but it is the deep affection, the care, that changes everything. When you mirror back to them that whatever has happened, whatever they have done, it can be faced, that allows someone to feel safe enough to untangle their stories and memories and find their lovability. To restore their capacity for love. Love has the power, the potency, to transform us deeply—and love is hard. It is the greatest vulnerability we can know. When we express it, we have no assurance that it will be returned or wanted or reciprocated. And if we have had our hearts broken—by lovers, by family, by community, by loss—we know that just as love opens us up to the potential of immense awe and joy, it opens us up to immeasurable pain and grief. In The Fire Next Time, James Baldwin writes, “It is for this reason that love is so desperately sought and so cunningly avoided. Love takes off the masks that we fear we cannot live without and know we cannot live within. I use the word ‘love’ here not merely in the personal sense but as a state of being, or a state of grace—not in the infantile American sense of being made happy but in the tough and universal sense of quest and daring and growth.” 3 Love is made even tougher when our culture hardens us against it. When we have been taught to equate love with weakness. When we seek the safe distance of hierarchies to protect us from the work of love. Our culture substitutes domination for the love that could exist between us. We seek power over one another and our environment in a way that perverts love into possession. There is no longer a place where love can be allowed to change us. Scrolling through TikTok the other day, I came across a post by a man saying that women want to be dominated, accompanied by spliced-together videos of other angry men to confirm his position. What terrified him so much, I wondered, to make it easier for him to post vitriol than to surrender to the love of a woman and discover, as an act of that love, what she longed for? What was he hiding at his core? The transgressive love of queer people undermines a society built on domination and exploitation. If some of us can love even where it is not advantageous or useful in the narrowest sense of our society, we threaten the myths of separation. The idea of welcoming love as a means of relating—to ourselves and others—is challenging because it goes against all our training. There is a resistance to love in a culture that puts us down, shames us, and encourages us to run after other, less authentic versions of ourselves. But what if we were able to see ourselves as we are, to embrace our histories, resist shame, and still insist on taking action? That, to me, is a love practice. In 2019, my friend Malkia Devich-Cyril lost her wife, Alana, to a quick-moving and vicious cancer. Before the cancer diagnosis, they had created a love practice for the ages. Their wedding, called A Love Revival, was the celebration of this profound and all-too-rare love. A love that changed the Malkia I’d known, a brilliant but combustible movement leader, into someone who spoke openly about the places their love had allowed her to go. When Alana passed, no one would have faulted Malkia for abandoning love altogether now that the seeming source of hers was gone. But she didn’t. Instead, she’s become one of love’s greatest proselytizers and a sage on grief. She said in a recent article, “Joy is not the opposite of grief. Grief is the opposite of indifference. Grief is an evolutionary indicator of love—the kind of great love that guides revolutionaries.” 4 Love is extraordinarily powerful, even in death. IN RECENT YEARS I’VE RETURNED to bell hooks’s work on love. In her passing, we have lost one of love’s champions, but in doing the work that love required of her, she has left us with a trove of questions, challenges, and insights for liberation and love. “There can be no love without justice,” she said. “Abuse and neglect negate love. Care and affirmation, the opposite of abuse and humiliation, are the foundation of love …. It is a testimony to the failure of loving practice that abuse is happening in the first place.” 5 It’s not an oversimplification to say that many of us who fight for justice, whether conscious of it or not, are fighting also for love. I have heard as much from others and felt as much in myself. Being loved has felt like being coaxed out of my body’s protection and received. And everyone I’ve known involved in social change carries the story or the face of someone who was not loved by the world. Before the grief and under the rage is love. We want to be loved on every scale, to have ourselves be loved enough that we are reflected in the world and systems we create. To be willed into existence and to be mirrored and protected. Love can bring us closer to the work of liberation. In her writing, hooks warns us about the widening abyss of lovelessness that sits at the core of our society. The people who are convinced away from love, who are love starved and embarrassed to need something so tender and primal. The people who have bought into extraction and manipulation and don’t realize that lovelessness is at the core of their greed. In the same way that oppression controls and directs trauma, it is set up to control the flow of love. When people around us are battered by the world, when our systems restrict and steal our time and energy, when trauma keeps us afraid of connection, it becomes harder to find our way back to love, for ourselves and one another, even as we long for it. When we believe what we are told, that instead of love, it is things, possessions, that give life meaning, we will fill our lives with what is disposable and never mature into a love practice that transcends objects or our individual selves. A culture that traumatizes its people and commodifies love as an antidote siphons love itself and its natural need for transmission. hooks fuses love and power back to each other, teaching us “that it is in choosing love, and beginning with love as the ethical foundation for politics, that we are best positioned to transform society in ways that enhance the collective good.” 6 Erich Fromm, a social psychologist and philosopher who wrote on ethics and love and whom hooks often quoted, said, “Those who are seriously concerned with love as the only rational answer to the problem of human existence must, then, arrive at the conclusion that important and radical changes in our social structure are necessary, if love is to become a social and not a highly individualistic, marginal phenomenon.” 7 Surely we know what the opposite of love can do. How politically advantageous it can be for a powerful few to cultivate hatred or contempt for individuals and groups of people. How distracted and misguided we can become when we pursue spitefulness and abandon love. We turn away from love because of pain or illusions of power, and increasingly we see it as weak because we are afraid of what it requires. And honestly, we’ve seen that love doesn’t protect anyone, that people who led with love died violently anyway. But it isn’t love that was at fault. One of my favorite sayings from Malcolm X is this: “We need more light about each other. Light creates understanding, understanding creates love, love creates patience, and patience creates unity.” 8 Love is the light we make in the darkest of times. The love this book speaks to, the love that it takes to heal, is a verb to be practiced out loud. It is the love found in listening. The love of hard truths. It is the love of showing up for one another when it is risky. It is the love of this inescapable web that compels us to care for the land and its sacred sites. It is a love that compels us to remember and relearn what has been lost. It’s a love that lets us arrive, present to this time. A love that like the light from the sun provokes a flower into its full bloom. Love can do things no other force can. It is only through love that we are ever really changed. There’s a love to be practiced that can tear down the walls of anything in its way. I believe in this destruction, but only for the sake of love. So that love can be set free in our relationships, in our institutions, in our cultures, and so that it becomes the shaper of our futures.