5 Engage with the World Anything could happen, and whether we act or not has everything to do with it. —R EBECCA S OLNIT, Hope in the Dark THE FIRST SPRING AFTER WE MOVED TO RURAL NORTH CAROLINA, what had been a modest gardening practice developed into something wilder and more consuming. My hands were daily in the dirt, planting seeds, weeding, plucking pests from squash, harvesting, and tasting what tumbled to the ground. Our hard work was rewarded in abundance, in figs, collards, and tomatoes. But the unexpected returns were what was shown to me of myself. My tendency to over-effort on simple tasks showed up when I tugged too hard on almost-ready okra and broke the stem. Slower, more intentional effort preserved my energy and kept the plant intact. And when, after I had staved off deer for most of the summer, they broke through my rigged fishing-line fence and cleaned us out in one night, the disappointment and anger I felt were clear lessons on properly constructed boundaries and impermanence. Composting taught me the most, though—how the discards, the rotting parts, could become fertile ground for the next year’s harvest. I’d visit the compost bin when someone came to me with a seemingly intractable conflict, or when I otherwise felt at my end. How, I would ask, can this mess become soil? The garden was more challenging than any social media account had let on with their polished pictures of people in stain-free jeans. I would never have known if not for the time I spent there on my own knees. I was sweaty most days, sometimes bloody, but suddenly savoring every leaf, bulb, and fruit as a miracle. There’s something about digging in, giving yourself over to an activity, that infuses everything that comes from it with more significance. Every meal we ate had more meaning. We savored our food. Pointed out each thing we’d grown on our plates and swore we could taste our efforts. It taught me a lot; namely, that you begin with an idea, a vision, but it’s the everyday work that produces the real lessons and the real change. The space between inspiration and what we might call the result is where things become surprisingly unwieldy, and beautiful, painful, and miraculous. Mainly, it’s where we become someone different from who we were when we began. We enter the same process when we decide to take some kind of political action, to make some kind of change within our society. There’s the point at which we can see the issue and imagine something better, then there’s another point at which we do something about it, even if in small ways. That’s really how we transform platitudes into experience, outrage into action, and these processes necessarily change us, returning our effort to us as power. Our lives get richer when we start to metabolize and heal the pain and the stories that live in us. We become more present, our lives more felt. We have more access to the experience of relationship. Instead of existing in perpetual reactivity, we spend more of our time in the vast now, where connection and possibility reside, which is all worthwhile on its own—life for life’s sake, as my teacher Alta Starr says. And yet we can’t maintain our healing if the conditions around us don’t shift in some meaningful way, if the pressures keep mounting and we keep losing what sustains us. When a president or politician says it’s time to heal after another egregious action by a police officer, they usually mean it’s time for the community to quiet down, to take our rage indoors, to stuff it into whatever corner of our bodies or lives we can. Never do they mean it’s time for a real reckoning, for repair, for a restructuring of the systems that caused the incident in the first place, which is what real healing, tending to the injury, would truly mean. In order for healing to happen at scale, on a societal level, we need tangible and significant changes to our institutions and to the underlying culture we live in. To get there, we all have to dirty our hands and become involved in the making of the world in far deeper ways than we’ve been taught are possible. And it all has to be done with one another. We are sold an approach to healing that prioritizes reprieve and disengagement, retreat and solitude, peace and calm. Of course, unplugging gives us the space we sometimes desperately need to reassess and listen, to hear ourselves, our own heartbeats in the silence. But if we believe that our wholeness requires long-term disconnection from the world, we run the risk of mistaking what is comfortable for what is healing, a sense of control with safety, and reinforcing separation and isolation. It is only a temporary escape, seeking higher ground as the shore recedes. And what about the return? Disconnection does not address what makes our lives unlivable in the first place. Healing in solitude eventually brings us home only to realize that what causes us pain, what causes many others pain, are issues much bigger than our singular lives—and those issues remain: income disparity, generational trauma, isolation, the slights and violence of being made a marginalized other. Such widespread systemic and historical injustice limits our capacity, and even when we are able to address trauma through individual healing, it’s not enough. Only when we come together to shape, dismantle, and rebuild the world can we start to end the ongoing cycles of collective trauma caused by systems obsessed with profit and not the well-being of all humans and the planet. We can’t change the world if we do not heal what has become embodied in us, and we cannot truly heal if the conditions that break and isolate us don’t change, too. The majority of people I’ve worked with in a therapeutic setting have been survivors of childhood sexual violence, a number indicative of a crisis we have never really tried to understand. Nearly every time that someone discloses their truth to me in a session, the words are said in shame. Long after the incident, they hold on to the story that they should have known better or should have told someone, that they are somehow to blame for what was done to them. Over the years, I’ve supported a lot of people, helping them to release some of the self-blame and shame, to feel some semblance of safety, and to enhance their experience of love and trust in others. But I also know that to really care about the harm that happened to them, I have to pay attention to how frequently these stories are told and how similar they are. To how commonplace and widespread this silent abuse of children is, to what it says about our culture and the people it creates. We each feel our pain acutely in our bodies, but our experiences are rarely as isolated as they seem. And when we put the onus on the individual to transform but ask nothing of the culture that makes this abuse endemic, we do nothing to stop it from happening again. In 2018, I worked with the Chicago Torture Justice Center (CTJC), an organization that addresses the trauma of police violence by providing survivors with access to individual healing services while building community and working to dismantle systems that harm. It was born out of a reparations ordinance passed by the city in 2015 in response to years of community campaigning and testimony at the United Nations. Statements there described the torture of nearly two hundred people, primarily Black men, at the hands of Officer Jon Burge and his team of detectives at the Chicago Police Department. Between 1972 and 1991, this police violence led to multiple forced confessions, and many men were incarcerated for years, decades even, for crimes they did not commit. The reparations ordinance allocated city resources to address the ongoing trauma of survivors and their families, and CTJC was formed soon after, becoming the only organization in the United States dedicated to addressing incidents of domestic torture. My colleagues Mark-Anthony Johnson and Francisca Porchas Coronado and I, along with CTJC staff and members, created a politicized healing framework to shape clinical treatment—in the form of individual and group mental health sessions—and community-building work. Our aim was not only to help heal the trauma felt by people impacted by police violence and incarceration but also to tackle the systems that had caused and were still causing oppression. The work that CTJC does is like nothing I’ve seen before from either therapeutic or movement spaces. It is holistic and comprehensive, treating the trauma of their community and advocating for justice and safety. One mother joined the organization soon after her son was shot dead by police at just twenty years old. She started coming to their Freedom Songbook group, a weekly gathering where survivors and their families sing Black freedom songs together and write their own. She came, she said, distraught, feeling deeply alone and helpless after losing her child. After a year of singing with this group, her blood pressure had dropped, her hair was growing back, her appetite had returned, and she could, for the first time since her son was killed, sleep through the night. CTJC has been building this model for the last few years, providing care and ritual for healing, for growth. They’ve created a strong community of dedicated survivors who are now beginning to develop a campaign to hold accountable the rest of the officers who committed torture. Their personal healing created the capacity for the organizing and the desire to create a campaign that will bring justice for the larger community. The two go hand in hand. Healing is necessary for us to care for our lives and how we feel in them, and it’s especially potent when coupled with our action and engagement in something bigger than us. So it is not one or the other, healing ourselves or ending oppression. We have to engage in both. MY GRANDMOTHER WAS A POLL WORKER, and when my parents and I arrived at the elementary school cafeteria turned voting station on Election Day, I’d spot her there, presiding over a folding table of ballots. Voting was a major neighborhood event. Everyone was there greeting everyone else with an air of formality we only ever saw after church service. My grandmother would be in her Sunday best, looking more official and dutiful than I’d ever seen her. She’d lean over the table, look me in the eye, and impart how important it was for us to vote, how we’d fought for this right. She’d hand me a kids’ ballot that made me feel official, too, and I’d take it to sit in the children’s corner while we watched with some reverence the procession of adults. Doing the math, I know now that my grandmother was nearly forty years old before the Voting Rights Act was passed and so she must have carried viscerally the import of the act and the reality of life without it. For a long time, I misunderstood what I believe now was at the core of her message to me. I took it then to mean that election days were our sole opportunities to engage politically with the system and so voting was important because it was our only democratic outlet. Only later did I really understand that voting rights did not come to pass with President Johnson’s sweep of a pen, but from decades of pressure from people just like my grandmother—regular, everyday, committed, brilliant people bringing petitions to church, calling on their neighbors, orchestrating civil disobedience, and organizing their communities. That side of politics was hidden to me. For my grandmother’s generation of Black people, voting was a necessary component of citizenship, of having some semblance of power, but it was also a symbol and reminder. It was a reminder of what we could do when we were organized, when we came together. Election Day was as much about the ballot as it was the community, the ritual of our gathering to shape the conditions impacting our lives. These moments of human connection around a cause have always been a pivotal point: the politics with a small p that happen every day. The personal is political and the political lives in our personal interactions no matter how much we might wish we could cleave them apart. At times I’ve felt suffocated by this. Politics can make everything we do seem so weighty with responsibility; it can be hard to move or think things through without the guilt of needing to get it right. Our lives can seem too enmeshed, the world too lopsided for any action we take to even seem worthwhile. But if we can drop the idea that politics means getting everything perfect or fixing everything we see, there’s a freedom in it, too. The freedom that comes from the privilege of shaping the world around us. To me, politics is simply how we make decisions about the resources we have. Who we decide is excluded and on what basis. It’s our actions and what we take responsibility for. It’s what we choose to do about the messes history has left us. In a time when especially national politics, big- P politics, can feel so disempowering, overwhelming, looking more deeply at what’s around each of us—what political decisions and actions we can make, what pressure our community can apply, what new way we can dream up—gives us the opportunity to feel the agency available to us in the risk of taking action and building power. It’s an opportunity to demand more from the world and create more in it. Lately, people lament that the political has seeped into our daily lives, into our homes. We are either living through a campaign season or preparing for the crisis and escalation of the next. Once-peaceful family meals have become battlefields, with people reciting cable news talking points or conspiracy theories from Facebook or their favorite YouTuber. National politics has breached civil bounds, and we are outraged, fearful, reactive, and divided; yet, for all our preoccupation with the spectacle of politics, rights regress and income gaps continue to widen, and political power remains located somewhere far away. For many of us, politics is a game played out in Washington by politicians who seem far removed from the realities of our lives, who have lost touch with our needs. They are unreachable and unaccountable, and we are left with our anxiety and no apparent way of stopping what is coming toward us. The reactive state sparked by our fear can cause some of us to spiral in panic or doom or chronically leave the moment in dissociation or coping. And we start to believe that it is this reactivity that is necessary for our survival. Our bodies give up on the possibility that there is another way. The force that brings about political change is power. Martin Luther King, Jr., once defined 1 power as the relative ability to achieve purpose. The more power we have in any given situation, the easier it is to do what we intend. The less power, the harder it becomes to exercise choice over our lives and what happens in them. Power is necessary for anything to happen, though many of us are raised to fear it. Because of how we’ve seen people use the power we give them, we assume that power is only domination and exclusion, not generosity and protection. The test of power, how we show what guides it, is in how we wield it. To me, the root of any power is in the body, specifically in our ability to be embodied in a way that organizes our cells and our self to act out a vision. As trauma disconnects parts of our knowing and our bodies, it can make our actions less congruent, and it can diminish our realization of our own power. But power is not only an individual’s expression. It is first felt in the alignment of our own bodies, then multiplied and amplified in our syncopation, in our coordination with one another. We cultivate power in ourselves, and we build power when we work together. IN MANY WAYS, I WAS lucky to be brought into social justice organizing young, just after college. I’m not sure exactly who gave me the idea that I could change anything about how the world worked, but I knew something had to give. The first campaign I worked on was for affordable housing in Oakland, led by a coalition of local community groups. New developments in the city were pricing out the people who had long lived there, threatening to uproot communities and disrupt lives. I had grown up with some housing instability, and at the time I was living in a communal house with ten other people; the room my girlfriend and I shared was a living area converted into a bedroom by tapestries hung over the entryways. That campaign was the first space where I could share stories of what had happened in my own life, of what I had seen around me, and have them be heard, where I listened to similar stories spoken without shame. It restored my sense of agency; that I could, that we could, effect change relevant to our own lives. We spent months door-knocking, talking to our neighbors about housing insecurity and rising rent costs, about what it means to have nowhere to live. Our groups spent the weekends asking local residents what affordable meant to them, and with that knowledge we proposed that a certain percentage of new developments remain accessible to the people who already lived in the city, not just to the tech transplants they were trying to draw in. I went to city council meetings and offered testimony along with other community members. We met with officials and found out quickly who was aligned with us and who wasn’t, who was motivated by concern for their constituents and who was in the pockets of the housing developers. I learned in that process about how local politics work. I saw that the decisions made were not handed down from on high but were always negotiated. The people who sat on those councils were elected and could be replaced by people just like us. And our involvement, though it didn’t result in exactly the win we’d hoped for, changed the outcome. Community pressure secured more housing units for those with reduced incomes than had originally been proposed, allowing more local residents the opportunity to stay, people who might otherwise have been pushed out of their homes. We’d done it by working together, building our power, and taking action. It was more than any of us could have done alone. This is small- p politics in action. To get involved like this, it’s helpful to know where to start. To begin with, we might first understand that we are all embedded in networks, that we exist in systems, as interacting and interrelated elements of a unified whole—we are not the free-floating individuals our society might have us believe. We depend on one another. We are one part of something bigger in so many different places, our families, friend groups, communities, places of work, or faith communities. Though we may not realize it, these are all systems. Our family is its own distinct organism with a shape and way of being, and we are surrounded by other systems like schools and prisons that we may not think directly impact us but that also influence our lives in many ways. These various interconnected systems ripple outward from us, an ever-expanding network of people. At the center are the smaller systems, our families and extended families, and then they spread, the number of people within them growing, perhaps to a neighborhood, made up of our family and lots of other families, and then to a region encompassing scores of families along with our own throughout a broader community. As we start to take action across these larger systems, it becomes impossible to do so alone. We need other people to make institutional and cultural change. We can’t transform an entire school or healthcare system alone. We need a network of more and more people, like-minded people who share our visions and are willing to risk involvement and work together. When we appreciate that, it is easier to see how we can start to make change, by reaching out to others, and through small steps at a time. While these systems are sometimes the sites of both individual and collective trauma, each of these sites, these systems, is also a potential place of action and transformation. Just as they shape us, they are places that can be shaped and reshaped, rebuilt and reworked, abolished and replaced. No system is static or infinite. Knowing this is powerful. Even in our families, someone marries, another dies, a secret is spoken for the first time, and the dynamics suddenly shift. A school in our town bans certain history books. A city council makes plans for a highway that will run through the core of a town, decimating local businesses and wildlife. A movement springs up after years of disquiet and it changes legislation and language. It brings people together. The bigger the barrier, the more of us it requires to change—but the possibility is there when we see our place and power in the systems we inhabit. The clinic where I worked when Trayvon Martin was killed did not have a break room, so the therapists crowded around the front desk in between appointments. Once the other therapists and clients were in their rooms with white noise machines humming in the hallways, we’d gather. We’d talk about race and economic systems, oppression and gender. About our role as therapists and what it meant to be providing support to people whose issues could only be fully resolved systemically. I believed very much in the power of the skills we were developing in our clients, and I also knew that we therapists had to think about our power and role differently from the way we’d been taught. Pushing the idea that everything could be faced alone, even with the help of therapy, could leave people overwhelmed and isolated. These conversations had become even more urgent in the wake of Trayvon’s murder. Why not, I’d say, encourage people to protest as part of their treatment? Why shouldn’t we have a reading group for therapists, so that we could really understand what was happening in our world? Why shouldn’t we know where our power lay and use it? To initiate change, we can only begin where we are and as whoever we are right now. As a therapist, as part of a larger institution, this was where I could start. We are all a part of something bigger than ourselves, a neighborhood, a geographic community, maybe a school. We are a part of a race, a gender, a faith, a profession. Each of these sites or communities bears its own challenges and responsibilities to the whole. Each has its own systems and norms, and each is a place where we hold power. When we turn to those places, bring people together, or join what exists, we move out of our little worlds into a bigger one. When we share experience, we create community, a foundation for change. I might differ on this point with friends and colleagues who are more rigorous organizers and activists than I, but I believe there’s something worthwhile in the effort to transform any and all systems that we are involved in. Our family systems are a valuable place of practice, as are our places of work, and the state institutions and their systems—education, healthcare, housing—require our action, too. I cannot see the world simply as what is big or what is small. Our world is entangled with multiple forces acting on us, and we act, very often, in accordance with our conditioning by these forces. So let’s begin where we are. Take the awareness we have and let it be grown, expanded, and nurtured by the awareness and commitment of others. When we engage, we collaborate with the world in its creation. We are able to establish and clarify our shared values, our visions, and give meaning to what surrounds us—which in turn shapes us and those around us. In contrast, to disengage from the world of power and resources is to allow others to mold culture and determine meaning for our lives. To dictate how we should look, what we should own, and the world we live in becomes increasingly divorced from what we really care about and more connected to the fluctuations of markets and our insecurities. Growing food has taught me about plants, what grows well, which creatures are my competition. I am part of an ecosystem. When I visit the farmers market now, I know what it takes to grow something from seed to fruit, all the decisions and care that go into it. My world has grown wider, more full. I notice now where food doesn’t grow, where concrete has replaced fertile ground, where produce aisles are sparse and farmers markets don’t visit. I can wonder how food deserts came to be, why there are neighborhoods and blocks that a city or county might choose to divest from. What the people there eat and how it shapes their well-being. When I am invested in the world, it shows itself to me with a new clarity—and I can be more ready to respond. Political theorist Hannah Arendt called on philosophers 2 to be involved in the world, to renounce lives of seclusion. She believed that in the space we generate together, where we struggle politically, where we engage democratically with one another, we bring our voice and experience to decisions that are made, we shape what is done and for what reason, and in that way, we go about the process of world making. We decide together what is sacred and we hold it as such. When Confederate monuments came down during the Freedom Summer of 2020, though only seventy out of the country’s seven hundred were removed, it was a powerful rebuke of white supremacist beliefs and worldviews. Monuments are important. They’re physical reminders, insisting on a history and asserting a set of values. They declare the victors even if they are the ones who technically lost the war, and they never belong only to the past; monuments have a vision embedded in them, too. Most Confederate monuments were built long after the Civil War had ended with the sole intent of glorifying the Confederacy and holding it up as an ideal. They were not simple memorials to fallen soldiers but grand statues to repellent leaders built in town squares and in front of public buildings so that they would be seen by everyone, not flattened into textbooks or hidden in museums. They beg history to repeat itself. Why wouldn’t racism persist when it’s what we choose to enshrine? I wondered when the monuments came down whether new ones would be erected in their place. Whether we could look history in the face and decide to preserve the lessons in another way. Such as honoring freedom and resistance and courage, with newly created monuments to Maroons or abolitionists springing up in the place of fallen enslavers. Or monuments memorializing rebellions against colonizers, reminding us how to reject domination over our bodies and land. What we remember, and how, does not have to be imposed on us. We can have a say in who we decide to canonize and in how we commemorate those moments—and those actions can guide us into another kind of future, one that we are shaping. There hasn’t been enough time yet for history to examine this, but I’ll say it here. While social media has been an incredible tool for activation around social change movements, it has been a real obstacle to engagement, a scenario that has worked well for some agendas and proved a barrier for others. As the most dangerous elements of the right have shown us, it is much easier to make people fearful online than it is to make people willing and able to understand the complexities of systems and take thoughtful and coordinated action to address them. This was a tension many of us felt in Black Lives Matter and was an ongoing internal discussion within the broader movement. The power of social media was smartly harnessed early on to connect people all over the world under a shared banner. Across the globe, millions of people found meaning in the phrase and the assessment that Black people’s lives were as precious as anyone’s. But breadth isn’t the same as depth. Within Black Lives Matter and in the Movement for Black Lives more broadly, people grappled with the challenge that while social media can turn people out into the streets it is not always the best tool for prolonged and deep engagement on an issue. It isn’t designed to build trust over time, or to inspire nuanced explanation of complex issues, nor does it generously and generatively step into conflict that stretches and teaches us, or require or encourage deep connection. Instead, it is designed for outrage, for the impulsive, the momentary. It cultivates the reactionary in us and can attract the most reactionary of us. We get the dopamine hit while our repost signifies that, for at least the present moment, we are the good person with the right politics who we aspire to be. But the process is less able to sustain attention and build relationship across difference. We are less able to commit to anything deeply because the intellectual and emotional energy it takes to stay the course of any particular issue is crowded out by whatever adrenalizes us next. People move from centering Black lives to impending climate crises to the threat of global war in seconds. These phenomena are not unrelated—in fact, they are deeply connected through the tendrils of our economic and cultural systems—but our way of engaging them becomes siloed and based on panic and distraction, a function of the media we use. Overwhelmed by constant saturation, we lose the wherewithal to prioritize how we might meaningfully engage with issues from where and who we are. We often forget that we can start by taking a moment to listen in to ourselves. What is within your purview to do, and who can you join with to extend your reach and build your power? The body that can engage in building what we truly need, that can sustain action over time, is something different from the distractible, unmoored body manipulated by social media. It is a rhythmic body, undulating, present, feeling, capable of curiosity, awe, rage, and love. It is a body that can generate a safety for ourselves and others, that along with the despair can tap into the possibility that if we commit and are willing to change and allow others the same grace we just might win. OUR EFFORTS TO RESHAPE STRUCTURES and the world around us aren’t only altruistic, if they could ever be called that, but are one of the ways we build the community we need. Many of us feel alone. Even when we are interconnected by systems, we may not perceive our connection. At the height of Covid-19’s sweep, when we still had very little information about how the virus spread, I saw many clients who were suddenly isolated, stranded in their lives. There were some who had to work outside the home, but the fear of infection had narrowed their day-to-day. Some I knew hadn’t left their houses in weeks. One person confided to me in a vulnerable conversation, “I’m not really sure I’m even human anymore.” And it struck me then how much we need one another, not as an abstract, but as a bodily fact. Human beings are a highly social species, and our nervous systems are wired to have other people around us. We do better physically and mentally when we have a strong social support system. Listening to my clients, I knew the most important intervention I could make was to be a consistent point of connection for them, and for other people in my life who needed it, to check in on the basics and hold space for their much more exposed desire now to belong. Getting involved politically opens us up to the messy world of other people, which may seem frightening, but we’ve seen that we need other people for our own well-being, and we also need people for safety and for building power. We need people because we grow in relationship. When we dig in together, when our ideas are tested and held up to another’s light, we become more than we could have been on our own. As we engage with one another, our ideas develop and deepen. Just like the food I’ve grown has stories inside of it. Of trial and error, of adaptations I’ve made. Of adjustments and learning and starting over. Harvesting the food was no certainty; it was the process, the journey, that made it so. And importantly, as we create change together, as we take on the transformation of systems from ones that harm into ones that attend to our living, as we insist on our visions together, as we disagree and align, support one another and learn to risk, we end up along the way creating the community we need. Getting involved in something larger than ourselves has the potential to offer a kind of healing, too. In the same way that we need other people to make a greater impact, we often need to engage and connect with the world to heal collective trauma. The trauma we experience on a personal level—such as being dehumanized as a Black or queer person—can be felt at a collective level, too, and individual healing alone may not be enough to address the bigger systemic issues. On the night that George Zimmerman was acquitted, or when Breonna Taylor or George Floyd or Tyre Nichols was killed, and on countless other days when collective grief and anger poured through us, we needed to move with other people to address the magnitude of the trauma. We needed to heal together, to be with others who understood us—and part of that healing is getting through to the other side, regaining our collective agency, and making sure those things stop happening and that they won’t ever happen to our children. We get remade as we remake the world. When we build something together, relationship is created. Our fantasies of perfection or utopia are replaced with something I find more relieving and real, that we are alive and connected, that there is more to learn, that we change until our final moment, that we are both powerless at times and powerful. Engaging the world is about making our contribution, about exiting the safety of the sidelines and feeling the texture of deep practice and collective action. It is in that fray that we each become and that the world we shape responds to our needs. If ever there was a time to reactivate our tools for creation, if ever there was a time to elevate new stories of collaboration, it is now.