9 Courage With brave men there is always a remedy for oppression. —F REDERICK D OUGLASS, “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” THE POLITICAL POLARIZATION WE SEE EVERYWHERE AROUND US seems to me to be born out of a tremendously feral fear. This fear stretches to consume all of us, though in different ways. All of us can feel the walls closing in and the borders being erected. We feel it happening around us because these barriers, before they are built in the world, are first built inside of people: in some of us, and in the people we know. We sense that these walls are constructed to keep us out, or to keep people we love out, or to keep us locked in, away from the undesirable and threatening hordes of others. We know that these walls are built from fear. And even though lines are being drawn between us sharply, loudly, in the rhetoric we hear and repeat, we know somewhere deep down that these lines are uncomfortably subtle and temporary. We are all only a step away from the worst that is happening to each of us. It only increases our fear to know it. A culture seized by this kind of terror and reactivity will cling to any form of power for protection, breaking the rules if it means self-preservation. It struggles to know or name its fear as fear or to imagine that change, though unfamiliar, could bring benefit or relief. We avoid talking about this fear at the core of our society and the cruelty it brings out in people, the way it infects people on every side of our common issues. It narrows our sense of connection and tinges our interactions with danger. The conversations we have with one another escalate quickly. Fear is present in every debate and inside of many so-called solutions. We are afraid and we are afraid to be afraid. This keeps some of us stuck in our incredulity or anger, while some of us nestle into complacency, hoping that if we are still enough, long enough, things will return to a normal we can recognize. Suddenly, we can see how the frog boils slowly. Perhaps we think that allowing ourselves to feel and name our fear would make the threats we face real. It’s easier to pretend everything is fine if we are numb. Fear is an indicator, a way our bodies sense what happens next based on what has been, but our fear is not always right—neither in its assessment of what’s taking place nor in its predictions. What happens from here can be determined by us, by what we allow ourselves to do with our fear. Is it possible to face it, feel it, rather than let our denial of it confuse us and make us vulnerable to stories that increasing separation and subjugation will create safety? Could this fear instead become courage, the kind that brings us closer to our lives and one another? Maya Angelou once said that courage is “the most important of all the virtues, because without courage you can’t practice any other virtue consistently.” 1 It’s true, though I wonder if it can also be said that the other virtues—compassion, honesty, humility—require courage in greater sums now because of how far we’ve strayed from them, how unprofitable and dangerous our most altruistic instincts have become. In one way, courage can be thought of as a skill that can be practiced; we can develop our ability to reach for courage in fearful moments. And in another way, courage is a state that we can learn to seek out. Eventually, we can almost crave it over comfort and certainty, knowing that courage gets us closer to authenticity, purpose, and genuine connection. Courage is the internal will to act despite pressure and risk. And when we take it on, when we are courageous, it changes us from who we were into who we will be. A lot of us think of courage only in big, heroic gestures: superheroes swooping in and saving the day. I remember my father would tell stories about his time in the navy, and those stories, to me, became the epitome of courage. It was always masculine and militaristic and backed up and reinforced by everything television told me about the shape of courage. His stories were embellished, I know, because they changed over time, the stakes always growing higher and the other characters disappearing from the narrative, leaving him alone to his bravery. I’m not necessarily denying the courage in some of those stories. There was risk, resolve, sacrifice. But courage doesn’t only appear on battlefields. There are other acts of courage that we all too often overlook or minimize because we don’t really understand or value what they require of us. When my mother made the decision for us to leave the home we lived in with my father, she planned it under the radar. Her best friend rented an apartment for us and we left one day, picked up our lives and started over. We didn’t move far in miles, but our whole world changed when she built a home for us where we could feel safe. That was courage if anything is. Healing itself is courageous. People stand on the edge for years, for a lifetime, contemplating if they will let themselves feel and face what they’ve suppressed. I remember the voicemail I got from my first-ever client. I remember vividly because of how nervous I was as a new therapist to receive it and how shaky her voice sounded over the phone. I had to play it several times to decipher her words; she wanted to talk to someone because she had not been feeling like herself. When she came for her appointment, I remember her walking wide-eyed into the office, afraid. She grabbed a pillow from the couch when she sat down and spoke to me from behind its protection. By the end of the session, she was crying and thanking me for listening. She’d always thought therapy was for other people, not her. But it was a huge relief for her to get things off her chest. I’ve heard some version of this sentiment many times over, and each time I realize that it takes courage for a person to pick up the phone and then to find their way to my office and risk being vulnerable with a complete stranger. At each step, the woman sitting across from me on the couch had swum against the stream of her own comfort and fear. She had resisted every internal message that she should remain small or hidden or feel shame for her own story. Healing, facing what is true, what we are afraid of, is one of the most courageous acts every time we do it. In all his stories of battle, my father never mentioned fear other than to say the people he was with were afraid. In fact, he was courageous precisely because, unlike the others, he’d found a way to conquer fear, so it was no longer a part of the story he told. It’s how most of us think of courage, as the absence of fear—how I thought of it, too, and why I never felt courageous. Even if we can acknowledge the presence of fear in a courageous act, we are mostly taught that it needs to be conquered, dominated—until we make it go away. That courage and fear coexist only in an eternal battle. But courage is something more than its relationship to fear, and it’s more than putting fear in its place. Researcher and author Brené Brown wrote on the etymology of courage that “ courage is a heart word. The root of the word courage is cor —the Latin word for heart. In one of its earliest forms, the word courage meant ‘To speak one’s mind by telling all one’s heart.’” 2 What this tells me is that courage is not even mostly about fear. Courage is feeling what matters to us the most. The team I work closely with has been looking at courage in the last few years as we’ve watched our nation’s collective fear level skyrocket and escalate every conversation. At a recent retreat, we did a deep dive into courage, asking what our bodies know about it, this force we can generate inside of us that knows fear but doesn’t succumb to it. How might we cultivate this virtue in each of us to affirm us in the hard moments, at times when we need it most? In our somatic trainings, we practice embodied courage, a courage that is feeling and aware, that doesn’t shut down our sensitivity to take action. When someone is afraid to try a new move or gesture outside their comfort zone, we don’t ask them to not feel the fear—because they already do. We don’t ask them to wrestle their fear or make it disappear. Instead, embodied courage for us invites fear, in all its trembling, making room for it to include whatever might be there, the terror, the grief, the connection, and anything that makes it worth it to act in the first place. Fear is an alarm, one that we should listen to. One that tells us that something we care about is under threat and fills our bodies with the energy we need to do something about it. Sometimes that’s to run and hide, other times it’s to fight back. Whatever impulses we have are rooted in protecting what we love: our lives, one another, our planet. We care and so we are afraid. It makes sense then that we feel fear when we engage in a death-defying activity like bungee jumping, or when legislation restricting lifesaving medical interventions is passed. In each case, our bodies are perceiving some kind of threat. The protective impulse of fear can be our wisest message, but at times we want what is beyond our fear’s dominion. We long for what only courage can help us reach. Kasha’s family has an intense philosophy about consciously and actively engaging fear and building courage that I respect but don’t necessarily recommend for everyone. In our first three months of dating, Kasha took me on a secret hike known only to locals on her home island of Kauai. For that reason I won’t describe it in too much detail, but I will say that this hike is treacherous and, I’m very sure, illegal. Technically, the “hike” is short, maybe two hundred feet at most, but it leads across a narrow ledge out to a boulder wedged in a cliff high above a canyon. When we got to the start, Kasha calmly offered a pule, a prayer, while I stood next to her feeling more terrified than I ever have been in my life. So afraid that once we began the hike, much to my embarrassment, I collapsed, twice; my shaking knees would not hold me up and my body threatened to evacuate its contents. When I thought I couldn’t get to my feet again and said so, Kasha looked back at me with an expression I’ve never seen on another person’s face, something simultaneously understanding and uncompromising. “Become bigger than the fear,” she said slowly. She didn’t tell me not to be afraid or try to assure me that there was nothing to fear. Instead, she was telling me to make room for my fear. Rather than become what the fear dictated, I could feel it and yet feel more. I breathed in and my contracted chest softened, and with the space that I had created I asked myself if I wanted to move forward. Turns out, I did. I wanted to see the view and I wanted the story of this moment and I knew that if I could walk straight out along this very narrow path then I would see something incredible. I zeroed my focus in on each successful step, allowing and incorporating the shaking that had lessened but still moved through me in waves. We made it to the boulder and sat there for an hour, laughing and just taking in the spectacular view of the canyon below. A new story started to upload: I’d done something I didn’t believe I could, and I’d done it while being deeply afraid. No fear was defeated or conquered that day. I’d felt more fear than in most other times of my life. In courage we are still afraid, but we resist fear’s contractions, we resist the suggestion that our shudders should be hidden. We stay open and let the fear move through us, letting ourselves tremble and shake and remembering that who we are and what we intend to do is sometimes big enough to face the risk. Embodied courage allows us to harness the rush of energy that fear provides and instead of retreating, we act. We do something risky yet purposeful. We show up for therapy and start our journey toward healing. We begin an honest conversation that we’ve been putting off. We walk across a narrow ledge to take in an extraordinary view. When our bodies experience fear, our stress responses kick in, flooding us with hormones and impulses that help us to react. When we embody courage, feeling is our guide. We feel fear and use it, expand around it to include it. Just before and even after we contract into our protective postures, as I did when curled up on the cliff, there is an opportunity to choose openness instead, to breathe and allow the fear, and to use the energy that our bodies have produced to move, with all our shaking, toward a purpose or intention bigger than our fear will allow. Remaining soft in the face of a million demoralizing and overwhelming incidents is an incredible feat of courage, too. Sometimes it takes courage just to be yourself. When I was twenty, I worked at a movie theater in Dallas and became friends with my co-worker Kiana, a Chamorro trans woman who performed drag on the weekends at the local gay club. Before her shows, I’d meet her at her house and listen to her stories about growing up in Guam while helping her get dressed. She was the first person who taught me anything about makeup or which bras to wear under sleeveless gowns. One night, I was looking over her shoulder in the mirror when she said, “You see how one side of my face looks different than the other?” I saw only then as she said it. Something about the right side of her face was always still and a little more serious than the left. “The doctors put a plate in that side,” she said, and tapped just under her eye with an applicator brush. “I was walking home last year from the club and three men tried to beat me to death. I rolled under a car where they couldn’t get me and that’s how I survived. But they broke my skull and jaw.” I knew why without asking. I understood then why she grabbed my hand and lovingly folded it close to her when we walked the three blocks from her house to the club, her singing at the top of her lungs, and I understood why she lectured me about never leaving without the people you came with no matter what. “You still go out, though.” I said it as more of a statement than a question. “I’m not depriving the people of this beauty,” she teased. She was not naïve. She didn’t deny violence; she lived bigger than it. She lived her life anyway and taught me that there’s a courage in being authentic that most of us never access. It’s courage when we insist on being ourselves in a world set against us. And it’s through courage that we become ourselves. The people we are inside, sequestered beneath the norms of society or the trauma we carry, can find their way to the surface through the actions we take. When trauma does its work on us, breaking apart safety, belonging, and dignity, it can disconnect us from the sense that we are actors and that we belong in the world. We are instead the acted upon, and that belief can stay with us long past the initial injury. Courage is necessary for the healing process, central to it, because it is the first step we take to retrieve our agency. When we decide that we are also shapers of this world. Courage is being willing to risk that same safety, belonging, and dignity—putting them on the line for the sake of something bigger: a vision, our principles, our power. It is not always, or even usually, well received by those we oppose, but we remember through it that there are things greater than complacency and comfort. There was something else to Kiana’s courage that I think rings true for those of us who summon courage especially in unjust environments. Courage is contagious and more powerful when we share it. One of the people I teach alongside explained in a conversation recently that courage naturally widens you. The person who makes a courageous act is a person concerned with something beyond their individual body. They act on behalf of a truth, a principle, authenticity, and it’s this that inspires others to join in their courage. Many people in our world, threatened by our constrictive society, must practice courage because of who they are as a daily, even hourly, exercise. When more of us are courageous, when we stand up to what is unjust or untrue, we lighten one another’s loads, we share the weight of the risk and create more safety for all of us. After that night at Kiana’s, I showed up every time I could to prepare with her for her shows. We walked together from her house to the club and back and we both sang at the top of our lungs, an aural force field of joy and courage. BLACK PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES have had to study courage, to enshrine it in our culture as a matter of survival. So powerful are the many examples of courage in Black freedom movements that one could speculate that part of what motivates the suppression of Black history is the threat these stories pose to any unjust status quo. They show us real courage that has love and concern for humanity at its core, capable of inspiring all of us. I think a lot about the internal constitution of these freedom fighters, imagining sometimes the way they breathed, how they stood against hurled insults and bodily attacks. I know the songs they sang in meetings to prepare themselves wove them together and gave them something to lean on when it got hard. Their courage was both full of feeling and sober about the risk, brimming with a magnanimous love. It was not a solitary, singular, macho courage that suppressed fear, though the stories have been told that way. It was a connective, generative courage that included and inspired people whose names we’ll never know. When I contemplate this kind of courage, I revisit Fannie Lou Hamer’s story. One of the most brilliant and steadfast architects of the voting rights movement, she was also a food justice organizer who fought for Black farmers in a particularly exploitative food system. It wasn’t until 1962 that Hamer became aware of her constitutional right to vote, as white leaders in power in Mississippi had used any means possible—literacy tests, poll taxes, fraud, intimidation, and brutal violence—to prevent Black people from voting. After attempting to register to vote for the first time, Hamer was fired from her job as timekeeper at Marlow Plantation and forced to leave her family and live elsewhere. While she was staying with friends in Ruleville, Mississippi, their house was sprayed with bullets by white supremacists. Still, she managed to register to vote that year. In June 1963, Hamer attended a voter registration workshop, traveling by bus to South Carolina with fellow activists. On the way home, after attempting to eat at a local café, she and six others were arrested, thrown into jail, and brutally tortured to the point of devastating and lifelong injuries by small-town cops in Winona, Mississippi. While forced to listen and watch as her friends were beaten, she sang hymns for their sake and her own. Hymns were their own technology that communicated and maintained a connection not only to God and one another in their harmonies but also to purpose in terrifying times. “When the darkness appears,” she sang, “Lord linger near.” Or “I shall, I shall not be moved. Like a tree planted by the water, I shall not be moved.” Later, when asked how she continued her work for justice, 3 she said, “I’m never sure any more when I leave home whether I’ll get back or not. Sometimes it seem like to tell the truth today is to run the risk of being killed. But if I fall, I’ll fall five feet four inches forward in the fight for freedom. I’m not backing off.” The torture Fannie Lou Hamer faced did not turn her away; it mobilized her. I have seen collective courage at work in organizing meetings, in the streets, and whenever people express their boundaries and say that enough is finally enough, that the ways things are structured have to change. When people are willing to put their bodies on the line, to spend their time outside of their lives figuring out how to bring about the transformations that we need. There, we can almost catch courage, as it spreads from person to person. This embodied courage does not override feeling or fear; instead, it catalyzes the energy they create into action. Our courage draws from the power of our vision to align our actions now. Courage helps us keep our commitments to the visions we see. Social movements are born from this mix of grief, fear, love, vision, and the courage it takes to change everything. That we face the unknown is a condition of human reality, one that we can’t escape. We have the capacity to predict but not the capacity to know. And for the foreseeable future, we will face unprecedented levels of uncertainty paired with potentially catastrophic risk: the threat of nuclear war, escalating climate change, violent and repressive regimes, inequality of opportunity and generational poverty, and the economic and social ramifications of artificial intelligence. It’s true that the unknown we face may have taken on a more frightening quality, but instability and uncertainty have always been at the core of our human experience. Much of what we have been trained to embody is, on some level, different ways of living or coping with the unknown. For some people, this has meant choosing to control others to maintain a sense of power, while other people have prioritized staying under the radar, not rocking the boat, in an attempt to stay safe. No matter what we do, we can never know exactly what is in store. So why not meet it with curiosity? With authenticity? With feeling and with purpose alongside our fear? Courage can be an attitude toward the unknown. A disposition toward the future and a commitment to greet it as it is with all the hard decisions and fruitful opportunities it could hold. As we look at the world around us, it is clear that we need large-scale change. But it will not happen without risking something of ourselves, perhaps by seeing ourselves honestly, by stepping up to lead, by speaking out, by feeling discomfort as we move outside our usual patterns. We shape change in such moments and transform ourselves in the process. Courage changes things and courage changes us. It’s how we become. I have found that there is a “right-sized” fear inside any vision for change, and in taking courageous action we develop a part of ourselves that can talk back to and hold the fear without letting it lead. Guided—and inspired—by what we care about, we become able to express our courage and act. The courage we need is the courage to fail and stay. The courage to reimagine every aspect of our social relations. The courage to relinquish grasping what was and build piece by piece a new structure for how and what we produce. The courage to exit the safety of our dying delusions. The courage to reach for one another. The courage to be honest. The courage to ask questions. The courage to listen. The courage to feel uncomfortable. The courage to be a part of the circle, to be fed by and to feed. The courage to surrender. The courage to know when our time is over and our roles have shifted. The courage to love and be loved. We need courage, especially now. The courage to heal and change. The courage to come to terms with our history and the complexity of the challenges we face. The courage to lead and create. The courage to be nuanced when everyone around us is rigid. The courage to be thoughtful in our solutions even when we are faced with the most reactionary tendencies. When we are courageous, we can do the unexpected and start to mold the world around a vision bigger than one produced by fear. Every inch of progress, every ounce of love, every truly meaningful action from here on out will happen through courage, not comfort.