8 Change is a Process A self that goes on changing is a self that goes on living. —V IRGINIA W OOLF, “The Humane Art” in The Death of the Moth and Other Essays I GOT TO SEE THE FULL RANGE OF SOUTHERN CHURCHES GROWING up. My mother, for reasons still unknown to me, would never join just one. We’d visit the multiracial Pentecostal churches to make new friends, the Black Baptist churches to see family, and the white Methodist churches when we wanted to leave on time. Some had full bands, drummers, lead guitarists, and hundred-person choirs. In others it was us, the congregation, who sang with only an organist punctuating the hymns. We went to churches repurposed from gas station storefronts and megachurches with stadium screens, churches where people fell out into the aisles possessed, and others where people only moved as if on a track, up and down according to instruction. Despite the differences in music, fashion, or food served afterward, every church, every Sunday, was in the business of transformation, and each had a ritual meant to get you to the other side. After the welcome and announcements, and the shuttling in of late arrivals (cue our entrance), the music would begin. When done well, a choir primes and opens you. Harmonies, crescendos, are the relentless aural reminders of God’s unwavering love and an invitation for your surrender into it. Even as a kid, or maybe especially, I could feel the portal start to open. The music would pry something in me away from my fear, something guttural, honest, pleading, wanting to be expressed. A good pastor moves you into this opening with fiery provocation, somehow taking a brief passage, in almost unintelligible language, and crafting a sermon that still manages to speak directly to you, your week of struggles on the job or your troubles at home. You are offered, through the Word, a path to a change so profound that you are like a baby being born all over again. I would watch the congregants, full on this possibility, step from between the pews and bunch at the foot of the pulpit, offering themselves up for this transformation. The church, as one sanctified body, prayed over them, swaying, shouting encouragement. And those too afraid or stubborn that week to let go of what bound them, gripped the pews so they wouldn’t somehow lift off, too. Just like the rapture of the Book, the repentant were swept up by ushers and carried away to the back of the church. There, they were healed of their former pain, forgiven for their transgressions, and unburdened by the past. It was a mesmerizing show. These people, who looked no different to me on the outside than they had a moment before, had undergone a metamorphosis. It was a miraculous, instantaneous, and complete transformation that we were told only required us to want it badly enough to ask God for help and mercy. At its best, church is a calling to this other, nascent self—a calling out and into this rapturous change. Church isn’t the only place I’ve experienced this. In organizing and, particularly, during protests, I’ve had moments that echoed what I’d felt in church, where it seemed as though it all might change at once. Even ideas of liberation mirror to me, at times, the way I’ve heard people speak of the promised land: a perfect world just on the other side. Pouring into the streets breaks down the fourth wall and topples along with it our societal norms. I’ve found myself, arms linked with strangers, singing, chanting. Turns out that just outside of our comfort zones an odd but familiar intimacy with everyone is available to us. There’s a power, too, that you can feel, buzzing, visceral, of what can happen when we commit to something together. The revelation of church and the revolution of the masses reflect each other in a way. Both are the turning over of old paradigms that no longer serve us. They are both an opening to the prospect and, perhaps, the eventuality of a different world and ways of being, feeling, acting. Each is, in a way, a ritual. They are intended to bring about change, but they are also a reminder to the collective of the ongoing possibility that we can grow and live beyond our current fears. Rituals of rebirth are the sparks, the initiators, the doorways we move through to get started on the path of change. They are a glimpse into what could be. We don’t plant seeds on top of hard soil. We turn the dirt over, or, at the very least, we nestle the seed into the soft and welcoming belly of the earth. Something must crack open, make room for new roots to settle in and spread. Our bodies behave the way the earth does. We don’t deeply change without first allowing ourselves to open. When I do bodywork with people and they lie on my table, I nurture these openings. When the time is right and safety is built, I might encourage someone into a breath pattern or movement of a part of their body that I’ve noticed they don’t inhabit; it disorganizes them, brings suppressed energy back to them, more oxygen into their lungs. I might invite them with their anxious legs to kick a pillow I’m holding with all the force and rage they may have forgotten they have, or I might hold them tight enough so they can stop bracing and feel what they have been running from. In bodywork, we take someone just outside of their container and familiar feeling to show them there’s room for the emotions or memories or impulses to flood in. When our bodies let go it can look any number of ways, sometimes wailing, teeth chattering, shaking, sometimes rolls of laughter. In this opening, where people feel emotionally disorganized, the practitioner reminds them, plants the seed, that what they love and envision makes feeling this odd, uncomfortable, sometimes painful sensation worth it. The vision is a guide that moves us through the unpredictable wave of sensations. The discomfort tells us to turn away, but there is a freedom we feel when we go through it. It is hard to describe to someone who has not experienced it, what it is for a body to open, but it is just as holy as falling before the pulpit and as righteous as a riot. It is the breaking of what binds. It is undoing so that we can become. The summer of 2020 always felt to me like a collective embodied opening, so many people all over the world meeting outside the bounds. That fall I spoke on a Zoom panel with a few well-known guests in the realm of politics and healing. One made the comment that the protests and Black Lives Matter as a whole had resulted in nothing meaningful. No federal legislation like our civil rights predecessors had achieved. The comment raised my hackles, this audacity to be so dismissive, but it caused me to reflect. Why were we so quick to see movements in terms of success or failure, rendering them either useful or unuseful to the ways we measure progress? Hadn’t it meant something to real people who exist now? Could the whole of that effort, the protests, the organizing that people did in their communities, be so easily disregarded? Was it not both an opening and a continuation of previous work? Of course, I can see as clearly as anyone that there has been a significant and brutal backlash against what happened that summer. A concerted effort to roll back rights and reinstate law-and-order talking points that suffocate any real attempts to review and address police violence against Black people. A backlash that is not only a reaction to what happened, the swell of 2020, but an attempt to prevent something like it from happening in the future. But success or failure is not about what one summer was able to do, or even one movement. What determines the impact of any moment of human outrage or uprising is not only the magnitude of the opening, but what we do immediately after it. The relief you seek when you walk to the front of the church on Sunday is only sustained if you commit to the Bible studies held on Wednesday nights. Going out into the streets to protest is not a substitute for building relationships or making the close-in changes in the places you live, work, and worship. If the next day’s actions do not leverage the power we summon in our openings, our calls to transformation, we get swept back by the force of things as they already are. There are moments of profound breakthrough that are so significant that we might call them radical, the pulling up from the root. But we can never forget that any moment of revelation is followed by a tomorrow, and tomorrow the work begins: the regular work, the attention and commitment to galvanize and sustain change over time, even amid the pressure of the familiarity and comfort of our previous habits. It’s what we practice, what we offer into the world, what we do in the days that follow that turn our rituals into our reality. In her 1993 novel, Parable of the Sower, Octavia Butler writes that change is the only constant in our universe: All that you touch, You Change. All that you Change, Changes you. The only lasting truth Is Change. God Is Change. 1 The novel begins in a dystopian landscape in the year 2024. The same year this book is published. Her predictions were prescient and alarmingly relevant to the timeline we find ourselves on. Her understanding of change, its ubiquity and force, gives us some insight into a phenomenon that is surprisingly hard to pin down. It is always and everywhere, each state flowing into the next. So constant that we might better understand change as the pace and process of life itself. This could be overwhelming to us, but is also, I think, an invitation to be involved in this process of transformation and embrace one of the greatest powers available to us. Some changes, more powerful than human beings either individually or collectively, act on us: the march of time, gravity, the process of aging, our bodies’ eventual death and decay. We don’t control these processes and so we are at their mercy as they dictate the stages of our lives. But there is also change that we are capable of making. Some of it is and may seem small, greeting someone walking down the street, but like the butterfly effect, one small action has the potential to ripple and permeate, changing that person’s day or yours and what comes next. As humans, together we can create change that is quite large, too, in positive and negative ways. Our modern lifestyles based on fossil fuel consumption have severely impacted weather patterns, threatening all planetary life. Our technological innovations, such as the ever-expanding field of artificial intelligence, are increasingly authorized to make and inform human-level decisions and will have an impact on global power and how life on this planet organizes itself. We can change so much when we want to. Generally, though, we are not a society that does a good job of embracing change. We avoid the lessons of the opening and neglect the practice. The process that is change gets replaced with our desire for the immediate. Society sells and demands quick fixes. Split-second TikTok makeup transformations conceal the work and skill they require, the hours of practice and mediocre outcomes, the editing that changes a sleep-deprived face into a perfectly painted mug with the snap of your fingers. Instant transformation. Scrolling our news takes us from one crisis to the next; we are shocked for a moment and forget just as quickly. We confuse action that creates real, lasting change with hashtags and reposts. For some of us, it feels like all that we can and have time to do. We misrepresent change and it is misrepresented to us. The messiness of trying is edited out as though it is uninteresting. Before and after looks like magic, but what is most miraculous is found, if we know how to look, in what we see as lackluster and banal, the in-between where smaller failures and victories are stitched together through commitment and practice. For us to appreciate the process of any change we undertake would mean that we’d have to understand ourselves differently. To open ourselves to the truth that we are capable of changing. And that change is small steps and big steps, happening all the time. WHEN I WAS IN THE seventh grade, I barely made the basketball team. Truth is, I did not make the basketball team. I had thought my moderate athleticism was enough to at least sit on the bench with my friends, but the coaches did not agree. So I stayed after school and begged them, promising to practice harder than anyone else. They must have pitied me because they reluctantly, but mercifully, offered me a spot on the B team. I played with full heart and dedication and, in the beginning, very little skill. I called my uncle’s girlfriend, who was a star player on the high school team, and asked for her help. She met me at the neighborhood court and taught me the basics. We spent hours on the layup alone. It seemed simple to me at first, just jump and make a basket, but it was harder than it looked. To figure out which foot I pushed off with, when to lift up my knee, when to grab the ball and transfer hands. I was frustrated by what I thought would be easy. A layup, it turned out, was not one thing but several moves, a sequence that I had to practice repeatedly before I could do it without thinking. The same went for every other aspect of the game, dribbling, passing, stealing, making baskets. Eventually, though I was not close to being the best player on the team, I became a starter known for quick steals and running the ball back for points. At the end of the season, the coach named me best defensive player on the B team and drew on the certificate a picture of a stick figure grabbing a ball. I was proud. I’d become a better player. And I had learned something about learning and the process of change itself. Repetition creates muscle memory and eventually embodiment, which means that when we do something often enough over enough time we will, at some point, no longer have to try to do it. It will come naturally. Most of our research on motor skills and muscle memory comes from sports science or early child development, but I don’t think it’s a far jump to assume that we can just as easily learn ways of relating to our emotions and engaging with one another that can become as embodied as our ability to make a free throw or swing a golf club. The key in each case is practice. We are always practicing something, somatics teaches us. Everything that we do well now, whether it’s knitting or showing up for our friends, judging others or working beyond our bodies’ limits, took practice to achieve our current level of mastery. What is repeated, learned, practiced, becomes a part of who we are. Our society tends to think of practice as something we do to attain a skill like playing the piano or baking bread. We put in the effort and the hours, and we see progress. We consider it less when we think of our emotional development or the way we walk through the world, but of course we’re practicing then, too. Every day, we practice our mood, our way of processing anger, or fear, or joy. We practice being receptive and open to others or closing ourselves off. We practice focus or distraction as escape. If we find what we practice effective, it will start to feel comfortable, like a familiar favorite coat, even as we watch some of these habits wreak chaos or disconnection. We don’t always pay close attention and so we may not understand how good we have become at these habits and what effect they really have in our lives. We have practiced, whether we realize it or not, who we are right now. Recently, I watched my eighteen-month-old practice crossing the threshold of the front door. She tried with different foot heights, holding my hand and then refusing my assistance. She tumbled and picked herself up without shame or embarrassment, waddled past my “Are you okay?” She simply tried a different way the next time. I counted that she crossed the threshold twenty times before she was satisfied in her ability and moved on to playing with her toys or inciting me to tickle her. When she tumbles and tries again, she’s learning more than how to climb. She’s figuring out how not to dwell in frustration, that another attempt can lead to a sense of satisfaction and fulfillment. And when she holds on to my finger or refuses my assistance, she’s embodying skills of trust and independence. As she practices, those emotional capacities will become ingrained in her alongside the skill of climbing. Embodied practice is the call to intentionally and with awareness practice what we want to become. Very often, if we don’t commit to a practice, name out loud our intentions, it can get drowned out by every other previous or imposed commitment we have. Our intentional commitment clears the room for consistency, making our intention into a practice rather than a one-time event. In practice, we encounter ourselves, our barriers and resistances. We work with them, listen to them, as they—and we—transform. Practice can be small, subtle, but its impact can still be significant. It is the steady revisiting and refinement of our efforts. Any change we cull doesn’t just arrive; it is made in the seemingly mundane and quiet return to practice, when no one is looking, a fire that catches from kindling. When I made a commitment to love, my practice was to maintain a breath-filled, soft chest when someone complimented or praised me. I had somehow practiced, without realizing, hardening my jaw and chest against kindness, preventing myself from ever receiving the feeling of love that was being sent my way. A practice can be as simple as that. To listen without trying to fix. To dance to a song that brings you joy. To attend a meeting a month. To create a nighttime ritual that cares for you the way you may have wished a parent did. Practice is the portal for change. On a panel I facilitated recently on practice, political organizer and theorist Sendolo Diaminah said, “Practice is your center. What it is you do because it is life-giving and from it you have things to offer.” Our vision shows us who it is we are becoming, what we long to build and create in the world. Our practice makes it so. If you want to become a writer, a dancer, a drummer, a good listener, or a present parent, you may find that you have a natural inclination, but practice deepens it, expresses what is you in it. When we fall in love with practice, we are less prone to the frustration and despair that come from repeating behaviors that don’t work for us. CHANGE DOES NOT TAKE PLACE OVERNIGHT. Our habits, whether they are about how we compulsively protect and hide or our training around supremacy and inferiority, were adopted through years of practice and reinforcement. We may have become embodied in injustice, in callousness, and in denial. We don’t just let that go. To imagine that we can is a setup for quick failure. If we do attempt to just let that go, we end up pretending that we are more evolved than we are and living with a debilitating self-loathing, or we cynically give up on the idea that change is even possible—which drives us further from compassion for ourselves and real, embodied relationship with one another. When I was twenty-seven, I had an epiphany. I realized that I was pretending to be much smarter, more astute, and even calmer than I actually felt. I aspired to all these things, but I wanted to be them now and thought “Fake it till you make it” was a grounded philosophy. I wasn’t changing as much as I was performing. So I dropped it. I started to admit when I didn’t know something. I emptied my bookshelf of books I kept there because they were the “right” books to own though I knew I didn’t have any interest in reading them. Clearing the shelves was a way of letting my home life be a more honest reflection of who I was, of what I knew and believed in that moment. Only from that place could I begin to authentically and deeply grow and change. It wasn’t the first time I had wanted to change in an instant. As I was growing up, I sometimes wished I could start over, be born again as my family wished, and then as I realized that was never going to happen, I started to wish that my trauma would just disappear. When I started seeing a therapist, I hoped I’d be made anew after a couple of sessions. It didn’t happen, of course, but over time, as I centered the practice of healing in my life, something else occurred, something more profound. My vantage point shifted. I learned that I could exist and even thrive with my trauma as the space widened between the pain of it and my response. It didn’t overwhelm me anymore. I saw that it was only when I gave deep commitment to my personal transformation that real change happened. Meditation has been my longest-running intentional practice. I find my way to the cushion most days, sometimes reluctant, sometimes sleepy. On some days my thoughts are jumping around, trying to escape or move away from some emotional or physical discomfort I feel. That sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach that I’ve been distracting myself from is just there waiting when I’m still. I can sit with it or grab greedily onto any thought that will whisk me far away. On other days I stay with my breath or my gratitude and it takes me straight down, like an elevator, into waves of feeling that, each time, I live through somehow. It is hard to say that I’ve gotten better at meditation per se, though I suppose in a way I have. The daily habit of it is more than just accumulation. Meditation has changed me, slowly, profoundly. When I get feedback from a colleague now, I run less from it than I used to. I don’t move as quickly into the stories about how bad I am or even how good. I can stay longer in the unformed feeling and listen to what is really being shared with me and what it means. Practice isn’t only helpful because repetition brings us closer to some kind of perfection, but because in each repetition we are met by our internal barriers, sometimes small and lurking, sometimes quite profound, that threaten the skill we are trying to learn. Practice is the recurring encounter with ourselves and the space to learn from it. The mundane is miraculous with the right attention. “I FUCKED UP,” MY CLIENT confessed over a Zoom call. We’d been working on his commitment of courageous leadership at work and, after hiding in the shadows and refusing positions where he would have to make final decisions, he’d co-led a campaign with someone on his team. At the launch meeting, he had choked in a presentation to the rest of their team. He couldn’t figure out what to say above the bare minimum and fumbled answers to his teammates’ questions. Afterward, his co-worker had asked what happened. She’d been empathetic, he said, but was disappointed, too. In our session, we danced along the edge of the shame spiral, careful not to drop in. We slowed down what had happened. When had his heart started racing? When had he begun the retreat into himself? When had the doubt that he could do it crept in? Could we find a way to make this bump in the road a lesson, an opportunity, but not a blockade? We were restoring his ability to tolerate being a learner again, putting himself out there, trying to change. When my kid traverses the threshold of the front door, as far as I can tell there is no inherent correlation for her between her failed attempts and her worth. The concepts are unknown to her, freeing her up to learn. Her failure is not much more than an opportunity to refine her approach. We don’t arrive in this world thinking that our inability to do something perfectly makes us unlovable. Yet, somewhere along the way, most of us pick up and hold on to this message. Shame gets wedged between our attempts and our learning. Our capitalist culture, organized around nonstop productivity and unbridled, ever-increasing profit, doesn’t leave much room for failure. So when we do fail, it comes with enough shame and social consequences that we overwork or overextend in order to prevent it, and we scramble to blame others or hide it when it happens. We lose out on learning, on the change that comes from each iteration of attempts and failures. And how our own attempts at change change us. When we’re allowed to fail, we’re allowed to change. I am sitting with this question of how we can be granted the space to deeply change, especially in the urgency of our time. How can we go deep but quickly? What in our cultures, in our values, and in our practices has to shift so that deep change is not suffocated by our impatience or perfectionism or shame? Culture is a hard thing to change. What we do and how supports both a logic and the goals of the society in which we live. But we can change culture in committed pockets, in community, where people set new aims, new visions, and create the rituals and practices to realize them. Social movements have the complex role of inspiring and ushering in cultural shifts in the middle of what is currently not working. In them, we should practice what it is we are becoming. In a way, that is the mandate of movement, to practice the steps toward our visions, unless we only intend to change the window dressing. But like everything, we come to social movements and create them from our own embodiment. From what we’ve already learned and been taught. From what we think of ourselves and one another. And from the painful lessons that have wormed their way inside us, the questions about our worthiness. Many of us come to them, too, without any models of the kind of relationships, the kind of emotional dexterity and self-awareness, that our visions for change require. A culture where we can change has to first be a culture that assumes belonging. When we see in our national politics a narrowing of who can belong, we are required to build in opposition a culture that is alive enough to value something more than homogeneity. A culture where the circle can widen enough to include everyone who is committed to care and reciprocity, no matter where they are on their path to change. I grew up hearing the discerning words often attributed to Zora Neale Hurston: “All skinfolk ain’t kinfolk.” A warning not to assume that just because someone looks like you or acts like you they are on your side. It has saved me a lot of confusion to know this discernment. The inverse of the lesson is powerful, too, and might actually be the harder one for us to grasp. That some of our kinfolk, defined by me as the people who are or could be on your side, might come from unexpected places. Where people feel safety, where they feel they can belong, they can learn. Curiosity naturally emerges from a settled nervous system. A rose can grow through concrete, but it flourishes in the soil. Commitment alone has to be the price of admission into the beloved community we create—everything else we need can develop in it. A culture where we could change would necessarily relinquish shaming as a tool of control. I know why we use it with our children and with one another when things go bad: It can, even if only temporarily, stop an action. But the underside is that it severs worth and holds belonging at bay. Shaming someone does not create the proper conditions for change, as it is only concerned with submission, which requires the internalization of badness. And badness, the sense that we are irredeemable, unworthy, is at the root of our most damaging and hurtful mistakes. Forgiveness and grace have much more to offer any culture than we give them credit for. They are rare sightings these days, yet where I have seen them, when I’ve been offered them, I realize that they are not the weak, pitiful emotions of people who don’t value themselves. They are the generous gift of people who know their worth cannot be diminished or compromised. When we offer grace or forgiveness, we refuse the false correlation between our worth and actions. But I’m not speaking about the kind of grace or forgiveness that coddles or panders. We don’t forgive out of our own desperation for another person; we forgive to invite one another back into our highest selves, back into our commitments. There is an acknowledgment that someone has been wronged or hurt, and forgiveness extends the possibility of trying again. I have struggled my way through forgiveness and grace, just as most of us struggle with them because of how often our hearts have been broken and how often we’ve been betrayed. I think it’s important for us to heed the warnings. Maybe eventually we can all learn to forgive far and wide, the way religions have taught. But for me to think of it that way is too tall an order. Maybe now we only need to forgive close in, nearby: the people in our families and our communities, the people we struggle alongside. Rather than denounce mercy, we try it in small doses. From there maybe forgiveness and grace spread and cover us, become more of the air we breathe. In 2018, in the stretch of time after I’d left BLM, Kasha and I rented a camper van and drove to the Grand Canyon. One night under the stars, facing the gaping fissure of the canyon, I started to chant, “I failed, we failed,” over and over until I began to sob. I kept crying until at some point I turned a corner and I felt myself grow calm. Here I was staring at this massive natural wonder that people drive miles to see, itself an erosion over time. It put things in perspective. When I got back home, I cataloged my learning and, somewhere, I started to dream up what I could offer back now. How could I take what I’d experienced and share it? I’d seen that our traumas made every hard thing harder. That our relationships fell apart too easily under pressure. That so many of us were animated by a pragmatism but not an infectious joy, not a love of the world and the people and the life in it. How could the way we lived inspire people to act as though their lives were worth saving? From my failure came a clarification of my purpose. To be a part of what Black feminist cultural worker and author Toni Cade Bambara meant when she talked about making revolution irresistible. 2 The revolutions that happen inside of us, the change we need and long to make, and the revolution in how we build and maintain our world. We will let one another down. We will fail and misjudge not only others but ourselves, too. We will try and give up, we will learn, and all of these are good signs, signs that we are alive. But we will, we can, and we must change.