6 Expanding Our We we are each other’s harvest: we are each other’s business: we are each other’s magnitude and bond. —G WENDOLYN B ROOKS, “Paul Robeson” MAYBE BEING A MIDDLE CHILD MAKES YOU MORE AWARE OF how tenuous belonging can be. Your version of parents is different from the version that was or will be. You do not have the striving parents of your older siblings or the permissive, applauding ones of the younger children. You have the parents who are already a little tired, who have not yet figured out that what makes them tired in part is the hypervigilance they will eventually abandon. It’s easy for a middle child to internalize the story that they are too much or not enough. It’s easy to feel out of place with your siblings, scrambling to keep up or always in the way. A middle child does not quite fit, has no authority that holds, is never innocent, and, being on the outside, is usually tasked with telling hard truths that no one wants to hear while struggling to make sure they can still belong once the words are spoken. I don’t put much weight in birth order theory most of the time, as Black families, thankfully, complicate all of the research. We create the family structures we need. We have grandmothers who are second mothers, cousins who are more like siblings, and uncles our own age. We make family our own way. I wouldn’t believe any of it had merit except the descriptions perfectly depict my life as a middle child. I had too much emotion, rocked the boat too often, was too insistent on being different. With the gauntlet of school added in, I had the recipe for a lifelong investigation into human belonging, into finding my place and my kin. High school lunchtime was a survey in self-segregation. Black kids took up two tables near the window. The ends of those tables became the beginnings of the tables where Latiné kids sat. There was similarity there, laughter and music. Lunchtime at those tables was a respite and recharge. At the center were the monied kids, mostly white, who pulled out perfectly assembled lunches. The nerds sat at a table in the corner of the lunchroom, checking equations and showing off the games they’d programmed into their TI-83 calculators. Along the wall were the skater and emo kids who wore wide-legged jeans and makeup. I floated between tables, talking to everyone, then visiting the wall on my way to the library, where I always spent the second half of lunch reading books to catch a glimpse of the world beyond our town. I had an irreverence that made it easy for me to strike up a conversation with anyone. I befriended kids in every group, moving back and forth among them, not worried about the barriers that people created between one another, fascinated instead by everyone’s stories, lives, and music tastes. I was grappling with my sexuality during that time, so floating between groups was a way of protecting myself. I knew that if I landed anywhere or stayed too long I would give people the chance to possibly see me—and then reject me—and so I never touched down. But from my vantage point, I could see everyone else, equally odd and beautiful, the way we were all, in our teenage awkwardness, living through the same sagas. Fear of my own rejection made way for an unexpected generosity of spirit. On the other side of our differences, I could sense that there were things common to us, interests and impulses, shared tendencies, though some were flavored or remixed by our own cultures. I could see people’s essences—even if I wasn’t convinced that they would see mine. As I grew older and queerer, my circles of belonging grew smaller and smaller. Church preached that gayness was a sin, made a big show of it on Sunday afternoons, as though loving each other were killing Black people. I was terrified of anyone finding out about me. I prayed to God to take the queerness away and when it remained in the morning, I prayed for God to take me in my sleep. My mother, no doubt shaped by this same fear, went through my things looking for evidence of my queerness and eventually found it. Soon after, she sent me to a therapist who specialized in conversion. For most of the session, the therapist prayed about how God loved me but hated the evil spirit that had come to occupy my body. I levitated above her and her incantations; my fear was the only thing converted. It distorted and split itself into an enduring shame and a simmering rage. All this time, I had feared that belonging could be retracted if I was honest about who I was. It was now confirmed to me that I could not belong anywhere as myself. When something that seems innate is taken from you, the pain of its loss tells you its shape. I know viscerally how our bodies need belonging, what it is to crave it, and what it is to try to give up on it. I know the cruelty it is to withhold it. For those who are granted acceptance by protections bestowed by institutions and a culture that celebrates you, the need to belong might be more difficult to identify. It’s a given, an entitlement for playing by the mostly arbitrary rules, rules that deny access and inclusion to any but the privileged few. But many of us on the edges know that belonging is survival, and when we don’t have it, our very existence, our lives, are at risk. Times are turbulent and unpredictable. No matter our affiliation or perspective, if we look soberly around, we can’t help but see that the world is on the brink. We are exhausted, anxious, and agitated. At a time when we perhaps need one another the most, when the threats we face spare none of us, we are our most fractured. Motivated by the barrage of bad news and the fear that these ever-present crises won’t end well, we’ve broken into factions to try to reverse the destruction or, for some, to accelerate it. Instead of turning toward one another to find collaboration and connection, we’ve calcified into the rhetoric of us versus them, creating sacrificial scapegoats from the most vulnerable, finding reasons for division and splintering along every aspect of human identity and relationship. Many of us have narrowed our visions and turned to protecting those we define as our own, our “we,” reining in our ideas of who matters and who is deserving of our care. The justification, we say, is safety, but the method is often dehumanization and a denial of our interconnection that only makes us more vulnerable. If we are to meet this moment, it requires that we find our way to one another and risk confronting the past. That we acknowledge the harm done and do the challenging and rewarding work of learning to relate to one another in new ways, expanding our sense of who we are and who we are related to. Belonging isn’t an experience we can opt out of or live without. For our species, it’s as necessary as the air we breathe. If the Covid-19 pandemic taught us anything, it is that we are all bound together in this life on earth, and our collective behaviors shape our continued existence here. We know that when a deadly virus breaks out, it can circle the globe and bring the world to its knees within weeks—and that our individual actions have important consequences for people we may never know. When millions of us banded together and suffered the inconvenience and stresses of multiple lockdowns, we slowed the spread of a disease and saved the lives of strangers. And yet, even then we could not erase the weight of history that meant that infection rates, deaths, and losses of all kinds landed more heavily on poor people and “essential” workers, and on disabled, Black, Brown, and Indigenous bodies. To move forward and heal as a society, we must confront and reckon with the facts that allow some of us to be more vulnerable to harm while many of us exist at the expense of others, imagining our lives as worth more, and hoarding power and resources to keep ourselves protected. To ensure our survival as a society, we must extend to everyone the safety and care we want for ourselves. To belong is to rest into the collective, to be woven into the all. It’s the feeling that the group has found meaning and usefulness in your presence. That what you bring is needed and wanted here. At the very least, it is to know that we are connected whether we like it or not. As James Baldwin wrote: “Each of us, helplessly and forever, contains the other—male in female, female in male, white in black and black in white. We are a part of each other. Many of my countrymen appear to find this fact exceedingly inconvenient and even unfair, and so, very often, do I. But none of us can do anything about it.” 1 When we choose to deny that interconnection by othering, by seeing some of us as less worthy, we refuse to submit to a clear and urgent lesson from our universe: When we don’t care for all of us, what is allowed to happen to me will eventually be done to you. The pathogen in my body will find its way into yours. Oppression manufactures and reinforces the idea that the “other” is irreconcilably and fundamentally different from us, is not one of us, to relieve us of any impulse toward consideration and care. It’s true that difference, like relationship, is a fact. But difference itself is not a sound basis for denial of entry into any community that is concerned with its own thriving and adaptation. The director of the Othering & Belonging Institute at the University of California, Berkeley, john a. powell, has said, “The opposite of Othering is not ‘saming,’ it is belonging. And belonging does not insist that we are all the same. It means we recognise and celebrate our differences, in a society where ‘we the people’ includes all the people.” 2 Difference can be a resource, an expansion of our skills and perspectives. Our edges and gaps are the places where we can benefit from one another. It makes a kind of sense that a society that exalts the individual, that extols independence, self-expression, and autonomy, would compromise the collective value of its people. This rigid and rugged individualism stems from one of our most central founding myths, that this country was created singularly by men who conquered the terrain and the uncivilized people who lived on it. These white men created and were promised a kind of freedom, allowed only to them, to pursue their visions, with little to no regulation or concern for the whole. On a societal level, this meant a contraction of care, excluding many to benefit the few. Because of this myopia, this hyperfocus on the individual, our culture has a hard time seeing in systems, seeing the interconnection between us. Human institutions and systems are made of individuals but take on a spirit and quality bigger than any one person can generate on their own. What we create ends up at some point creating us. It’s how rigid inventions like race or gender can persist and evolve long after the original authors of these fictions are gone. Ghosts animate the machine. But our training and sense of ourselves as individual keep us from acknowledging that what came before lives in the foundation of our moment, keeps us from understanding what water we are swimming in, and how we create, mindlessly, a version of what already was. A culture of individualism doesn’t require us to consider that as our power grows, so too might our responsibility to others. Under its spell, we are accountable for just our one life and lifetime, able to act with the recklessness of a meteor, crashing through resources without concern for their renewability. We do not have the ability or incentive to see seven generations down the line as the Haudenosaunee nation instructs. Instead, we praise hoarding and greed, and make taking into an individual right, without expecting that we owe something to the people and social fabric that made us. Stories of how we did everything on our own, alone, the pioneer, are the only kind of stories individualism recognizes as legitimate. A story that is surely never true but conveys a triumph over circumstances and, too often, the people around us. To tell that story we have to deny our teachers, our supporters, the people who taught, fed, and loved us, the systems and history we navigated. If we cannot bootstrap ourselves into dominance, we end up living alone. The child of individualism is isolation—and for social animals, isolation is deadly. It deteriorates our minds and bodies and creates health risks for the individual and danger for the group. There’s vulnerability in being left behind. We can become prey, lured into the traps of ideologies that would use our bodies for their own purposes, to secure their own power. Mass shooters are always described as isolated, lone-wolf gunmen. It’s hard to reconcile how common these stories have become with how alone the young men that commit them seem to be. It’s their isolation and the vulnerability of it that connect them to one another. Their sense of disconnection has consequences for the whole. The way we’ve set it up now, what is substituted for true belonging is proximity to power. There’s no rest or reassurance in our belonging, no trust that what is innate to us is accepted. Instead, there’s a grasping, an insecure scramble for the top. Belonging, as we know, can be retracted. Groups can be pitted against one another even though what they share is more substantial than what separates them. People can easily be isolated or singled out, as we’ve seen with the increasingly unsettling attacks on gender nonconforming and trans people. We can come to believe that the only way to secure our rights is to undermine or threaten the other: the zero-sum game. We protect who sits at the top of this unstable pyramid, and stay focused on how to belong the way they do, forgetting that we would build a stronger, wider power if we focused on who was relegated to the bottom, who barely registers as human in this society. SOMETIME LAST YEAR, I WAS in conversation with a woman, whom I think it is important to name as white, who’d recently come out as lesbian. She asked me if one way to resolve injustice would be to sit down with people who might reject me because of race or sexuality and show them that I was, in the end, just like them. It had worked with her own family, she said, her explaining to them that she and her wife were normal, churchgoing, taxpaying people. I told her I had few problems sitting down with anyone, but the frame of her question was dangerously askew and offered up something of her—and my—soul for barter. “Who in the end is more human than you or me that we should plead for acceptance into their version of humanity? I am not just like them and I am human still.” We have been told for so long now that difference makes us alien that we’ve come to accept it and to grant other people the right to gatekeep us, to make us ask for admission into their narrow concept of who belongs, who is useful. Expanding our concept of “we” is not about erasing difference but about redefining human to include all of us for who we really are. When Toni Morrison was seventeen, she saw footage on the news of a group of white mothers in the South trying to overturn a school bus filled with Black children on their way to integrate schools. It was shocking, baffling, to her how these mothers could threaten the lives of children, terrorize a bus full of other mothers’ babies. She tried to understand their ruthlessness and depravity, what logic they used to justify it to themselves, and the only way she could come close to the fear and rage they seemed to feel was to look outside of our own species: “I said suppose … horses began to speak. And began to demand their rights. Now, I’ve ridden horses. They’re very good workers. They’re very good racehorses. Suppose they just … want more. Suppose they want to go to school! Suppose they want to sit next to me in the theatre. I began to feel this sense of—‘I like you, but …’; ‘You’re good, but …’ Suppose they want to sleep with my children?!” 3 These women could not see their violence as irrational, morally impoverished acts against the most vulnerable of us because they had been so trained to see Black people as less than human, an adjacent and infiltrating species set apart. Around 2014, I wrote a post on Facebook: It would be different if slavery were simply coercive employment. But in order for the system to work as well as it did, it relied on people understanding themselves as God surrogates and convincing others they were subhuman. These are massive psychological, emotional, and spiritual shifts that no policy could touch or change. We left slavery with no shared agenda on how we all find our way back to what is actually true. Instead, we’ve been passing down slightly reformed versions of this same perspective, lost in the confusion, with little sense of what needs to change. Slavery is not just an economic story. It’s a story of how humanity can betray itself, it’s the story of what destruction a lie can do, how people can be traumatized and terrorized out of their selves, and yet reshape what is truly humane, and how others must fall from the lie of innocence to become tender, listening, rooted, and human again. Those women’s actions against children on a school bus are a replication of this fundamental and seductive delusion, this negating of another person’s humanity. It’s mirrored in the rhetoric of the so-called Great Replacement theory, and we see it in mass shootings in churches and stores that Black and Brown people frequent and in Charlottesville in 2017 when white supremacists chanted, “You will not replace us.” Who is the “us” that is facing replacement, I wonder, watching their reddened faces shrieking into the camera? Are they really afraid for their bodies or afraid for their place in society? Do they know but won’t admit that it’s their use of violence and domination whose time has actually come? That their bodies are not being asked to die, only their practices of othering and exclusion that deny our connection, our shared humanity? As horrific as these acts are, as terrifying as their consequences have been across time, they are the acts of the small-hearted, the fearfully cruel. They are not the courageous acts of people who can build futures, but eruptions of the basest of human tendencies and an immature fear of the dark that attempts to turn difference into monstrosities it can defeat. This tendency to dehumanize betrays an underdevelopment, an overidentification with a flimsy self-concept. It is a contraction we hold in society that says safety can only be granted for some. From the beginning of Black Lives Matter, in a departure from past iterations of Black movement, the declaration has been that All Black Lives matter. The signal there was that we need to work as hard to end violence against Black women and girls, trans women, and gender nonconforming people as we do the unjust, brutal murders of Black men. Rekia Boyd. Toyin Salau. Breonna Taylor. Atatiana Jefferson. Sandra Bland. Ma’Khia Bryant. Their lives matter no less. The hard truth is that many of those who violate women and queer people are in fact the Black men who are said to love them or at least desire them. Black people have not been immune to these small, fearful rankings of people, to subjugating the feminine, to fearing the dark in us. It’s a painful contradiction, but one that is worth telling the truth about. We can deny full humanity even to those to whom we are closely related and expected to care for. The mirror often scares us. When a Black trans woman is assaulted in her own community because her insistence on her own life reflects to some men the constraints they apply to their own bodies and emotions, their violence toward her is a violence toward the part of themselves that is also soft and beautiful. It splinters their own interiors into a million isolated others. The need for reckoning and reformation goes deep. Our definition of human and whom we allow to belong has to be brought down from its perch of exclusivity, disassembled, and reimagined. We need to remove the imposed stratifications and hierarchies. I choose to redefine humanity on terms bigger than my own reflection or my own comfort. Humanity is varied, changing, a species capable of great beauty and destruction, struggling to feel all that we are capable of—love, for example, and the fear and reality of our death. A species still barely known to itself, barely willing to call one another by name, and still only beginning to encounter the magnitude of being alive at all. What is it possible for a human to be? What is shared between us beyond phenotypes or regions? When we have been trained or traumatized into a warped belonging, we might think that the only way we can belong is to control the bodies of the people around us, or we might have come to believe that belonging means that we have to hide our bodies and feeling away. None of this is the kind of belonging that settles us or sets us free. Instead, we need to practice new ways of connecting and ways of creating relationship that are strange and beautiful. KIN EVERY SUNDAY NIGHT AT MY HOUSE we have family dinner: my partner, Kasha; our kid, Amaya; and Denise, a dear friend whom I’ve known for a decade. Last year, we convinced Denise to move near to us from where she was living in Florida because when we’re together it’s such an easy, fun time. A couple of years ago, she mentioned that she was starting to think about who she wanted to be close to as she got older. She doesn’t have children, though she has loved and nurtured so many people in Black movement. Kasha and I both, if we’re honest, need intergenerational relationships, need the wisdom and dad jokes of someone older than us, and we wanted our child to grow up around someone who balances sweetness and conviction the way Denise does. “Denise,” I’d said, “come here and we’ll take care of each other. We want to make family with you.” When the Covid-19 pandemic hit, it seemed as good a time as any to start creating the kind of kin we needed. Every Sunday, Denise brings her dog Bandit, a love child of our dog Scout and a rambling Doberman who broke into our yard, and sibling to our Little Bear. Each household takes turns preparing the meal. It’s often the most elaborate one I have each week. Over food we share our exciting news, our heartaches, too, and our assessments of the state of the union. This gathering is our safe harbor in the midst of many storms, where we can be both petty and profound, where we laugh and confess and remember what it is to belong in someone’s care. I have been elected to say our grace, so before each meal I say a prayer that usually ends with something like “Thank you to the force that is greater than us, to our creator, for this opportunity to intentionally make a family out of love.” At the end of the meal, Denise helps us clean up and we put Amaya to bed. The dogs cuddle in theirs and we talk on the couch or sit in the hot tub until we are sleepy, too. All of this is part of the ritual that binds us, this family we’ve made. No one teaches us how to build a family, how to decide that people with whom we share no blood are relatives. We know somehow that romantic love can do it, can fuse our lives to another person’s, but it’s a magic we’re told is reserved for the one. Queerness says different. The story of the outcast, the expelled, if they survive, is often the story of love in unforeseen places. Family forged in unconventional and peculiar ways. People taking care of one another, making someone who was a stranger our very own business. Abandonment can push us to admit what others often won’t: We all need one another to survive, and it is our insistence on narrowing our care and concern, on throwing away those we treat as other, that jeopardizes our ability as humans, as societies, to flourish. Writer and scholar Donna Haraway talks about the need to create 4 other and new bonds to face our difficult times, saying, “Staying with the trouble means making oddkin; that is, we require each other in unexpected collaborations and combinations, in hot compost piles. We become—with each other or not at all.” “This kinship,” she has said, “is reciprocal and non-optional, that if you have a kin, a kin has you.” Oddkin, chosen family, strange and beautiful affiliations, open up new pathways of relationship and social formations—and may be exactly what we need right now to survive. Practicing kinship is looking into one another’s faces and admitting that we are familiar and related. It’s rejecting the fear that there is not enough care for all of us, an unfortunate illusion created by our current systems and culture in which separation from and by one another produces the perception and reality of scarcity. Instead, kinship creates the abundance we need. Who do we care about, and how are we willing to care about them? Who are we responsible for? When we ask ourselves these questions, we can begin to move beyond narrow concepts to expand our sense of “we” by extending our care beyond the confines of what we’ve been taught, and to expand our bodies to be able to live with the complexity and complication of what another person’s perspective and life may reveal to us. This expansion is an orientation more than a goal, and it happens in the dangerous terrain of intimacy, of connection made possible through the skills of authenticity, setting boundaries, and trust, both as embodied skills and as felt capacities. It is both a feeling and a way of being transformed by a reality we can only encounter through another: an embodied joining, a true connection. EMPATHY MAKING ODDKIN, FINDING KIN IN other people, requires that we know empathy and that the cultures we create reinforce it. Empathy, the capacity to understand and feel what another person is experiencing, is one of the first things you learn about when becoming a therapist. It’s key to the therapeutic alliance, the kind of relationship that makes it possible for someone to feel safe enough to be vulnerable. It is not as easy as it sounds. In my first few sessions as a therapist, I wanted more than anything to be useful to the people who came to see me and to be good at what I was doing. So when they presented their problems, I scrambled for quick fixes, defined answers to their questions. I knew that when in doubt the thing to do was to listen more deeply, but instead I found myself giving advice or pointing out a pattern of behavior my client seemed to be unconsciously laying out in front of me. After a while, I took my anxieties to my supervisor, who explained to me that empathy was a way of being with another person and allowing what they are holding to touch you. That empathy has the power to create a sense of safety for people in their own emotions or experience—especially for someone being received for the first time just as they are. I had wanted to fix, I discovered, not only to relieve them of their troubles but also to lift myself out of the chaos, out of my own insecurity and fear that the feeling would rub off on me. Empathy is something much more vulnerable. Fixing, after all, is just another way to stop feeling. With empathy I found more feeling, not less. More connection, not less. I could sit with the people I worked with and let their experience affect me. I could have enough curiosity to consider what it meant to them, not just how I might react to it. Empathy is distinct from sympathy, which is protective at its root. Sympathy is offered from a safe distance. It’s often a performative “I’m sorry that happened,” without being willing to feel any of it. Sympathy is handed down from on high. Empathy also isn’t the kind of guilt that confuses us into believing that if we feel badly enough something will change. It won’t. What really changes things are our connections, meaningful relationships, and the actions we take on together to create something new. The thing about empathy is that most of the time it comes when we stop trying to do anything and allow ourselves to actually listen and feel. A lot of times we resist letting in someone else’s pain. But if we are unwilling to feel for someone in their grief, we are, in essence, unwilling to know them and know ourselves. And if we are unwilling to know someone, if we’d rather keep a safe distance through sympathy or apathy, we likely won’t know how to have their back when it counts. Empathizing is the embodied act of widening our sphere of care. In the folds of empathy lie both longing and curiosity. Longing is the full-bodied pull toward another person or to a future, and curiosity is an openness to learning what we don’t yet know, that by its very nature may cause us to feel or change. To be empathetic means that we allow ourselves to be impacted by another without merging with them, by maintaining our own center in the connection. It can take a kind of internal safety to be curious, to stay steady as relationship opens itself to us and shows us things we didn’t know. Empathy is listening with an open chest that allows us to understand. ALLYSHIPS AND ACCOMPLICES I WAS TEMPTED TO PROVIDE a checklist of tasks and tips on how to be a great ally or accomplice in the fight for justice, but any lists you need have already been written. And to be honest, I believe they provide cover for the deeper transformation, the fundamental change that is necessary for their advice to stick. We don’t really change on account of good ideas, no matter how much we may wish to, or because we hope to be perceived as politically correct, or even because we truly want to find a way to make things better. Instead, we change because we have surrendered with our bodies to feeling something new, to expanding our capacity to experience a wider range of emotions, to deepen relationships, and to open our awareness. I was really changed recently by something Kasha said to me in a conversation about allyship—which was that we must first be able to feel grief, our own, before we can truly become an ally to anyone else. We have to know what it is to have lost. For all of us striving to achieve, climbing the ladders of success or acceptance in our society, that might well mean we have to stop and admit that there’s something that we’ve given up to play the game. There are things worth grieving that have been taken from all of us. Knowledge about the ecosystem that we’re a part of, the ability to be vulnerable and intimate with one another, the resilience practices of our ancestors, reverence for the great mystery of it all. When we don’t know our own grief, we aren’t able to really listen when someone tells us what they’ve lost or are losing or what has been taken from them, perhaps for our benefit. We aren’t able to show up for anyone else because we’ve disallowed the power and connection that are possible when we feel. I’ve needed this kind of allyship with people around gender. I’ve done so many Gender 101 trainings for organizations, but none of them ever hit home until I showed people that gender is not something that only queer people are afflicted with, that gender is an experience all of us are navigating at any point in time. We’re all making assessments about how we present, and most of us feel some insecurity at not meeting the standards set out for us. Are we pretty enough, strong enough, tall enough, jaws chiseled enough, waists thin enough to be real? Allyship, though, is not about flattening our experiences. We are not all going through the same things, and some people are more explicitly punished for their difference, some are feeling the pain more acutely and alone. This is true, but cultivating an empathy that allows another person under your skin is the beginning of building meaningful and real connections and trust. We retrieve some of our humanness through feeling our own hurt and only then can we sit with the reality of another’s grief and pain. All of us, every people, have a history with pain. It is how we find one another through our varied stories and bodies. If we skip that step for our own safety and comfort, or if we opt for guilt that keeps us from feeling our own loss and despair, guilt that keeps us safe on a pedestal, there will come a point when we turn around, a moment when we will not have the courage to do what is needed, because we won’t yet know that as we fight for another’s life we are fighting for our own. Allyship is not just something we think we are or can do. It requires our bodies to feel, to develop, and to experience empathy, and to take action and risks where appropriate. Allyship requires each of us to begin to put our bodies in new places, sometimes in front of people who would be picked off, sometimes having the backs of people who can lead us into places we haven’t gone, the same people we have been trained to be glad we are not. There are no saviors in a circle, no heroes, just people taking risks for a vision of another way. There is more evidence for this kind of solidarity than we are told about. In fact, I would guess that it would be impossible to study any movement, any people’s struggle toward freedom, and not find, somewhere along the edges, that empathy inspired people who were not in the crosshairs to become allies and join their fight. In recent years, cross-racial organizing by Asians 4 Black Lives has demanded an end to state violence and anti-Black sentiment in their own communities, multi-faith actions called for an end to Trump’s so-called Muslim bans, and after a series of anti-Asian hate crimes people from different communities rallied across the country to condemn the violence and show support for Asian Americans. These are all examples of allyship that we can learn from. BELONG TO EARTH WHEN NO ONE ELSE HAD ME, it was the ground that held my feet. When I felt my most insecure or unwanted, I always knew how to get lost. In the depth of the forest, the movement of the creek. I can tell by how my attention settles that I belong here, if nowhere else. That I am from and of this ecosystem. It’s a belonging I haven’t had to doubt. When we feel alone, it can be helpful to be with the life around us that has remained here whether or not we see or acknowledge it. Microbes and insects, birds and trees that are regenerating, adapting, restoring. When we look for models of allyship, we can learn from the steadiness of the earth beneath our feet. It has always been here, living alongside us, but recently many of us have moved away from it, grown separate, and stopped caring. We extract from this earth that nourishes us without replenishing; we encroach upon it, trampling land and creatures without acknowledgment or restoration. We no longer see the people who grow our food, or know where it comes from, and we don’t eat according to the seasons. This separation has allowed us to strain the environment in which we live in ways that threaten our survival and the survival of other life in our ecosystem. Climate change is showing us the impacts of our deep disconnection, of not feeling a sense of belonging to earth. While there is no map showing us how we get out of this confusing story, I believe it will require us falling back in love with the complex ecosystem that creates and sustains us. As scientist and author Robin Wall Kimmerer says, “We need acts of restoration, not only for polluted waters and degraded lands, but also for our relationship to the world.” 5 And for our relationship to one another by fighting for a different way of life based on reciprocity and renewal. It is the role of transitional characters, the people willing to take on the work of transformation in their spheres of care and influence, to move away from the narrowing and isolating trends of this time and to build authentic community with one another in all our vast humanity, one that ultimately creates more safety for everyone. Last summer, I led a beautiful embodiment training that turned into a celebration of divinity. On the last night, the participants headed to the pool and I stopped in to say my goodbyes. One person called me over to the edge and said, “Did you notice how everyone is floating in a perfect circle? Every time someone joins, a space just opens up without anybody saying anything. The first night we came to the pool we were all over the place, and tonight it’s like we’ve become our own organism.” There is almost nothing more profound or more terrifying than the simple act of reaching for each other. There is no real intimacy that does not begin with listening. And there is no chance that we can show up for each other if one or both of us is still somehow an object. The task ahead of us is hard, to weave a belonging between people who have never belonged to one another or have forgotten what it is to accept and invite. To fold ourselves back into earth, as creatures of it and not above it. It’s hard because of how many barriers we’ve built between us. But like so many things that seem difficult at first, to start the work of belonging is deceivingly uncomplicated. It is putting aside, in this moment, the stories we tell, not of difference, but of inherent and complete separation. We are already kin, whether we like it or not. So how can we live as though our living depends on one another?