7 Things Fall Apart I know the world is bruised and bleeding, and though it is important not to ignore its pain, it is also critical to refuse to succumb to its malevolence. Like failure, chaos contains information that can lead to knowledge—even wisdom. —T ONI M ORRISON, “No Place for Self-Pity, No Room for Fear” AT THE END OF 2017 I HAD A HEALTH SCARE. AT THE TIME, I WAS on staff at Black Lives Matter Global Network, and we were at the height of crisis. In fact, we’d spent most of our time that year responding to crises: ongoing police violence, pressure from the media, threats from the right, and challenges that originated inside the organization—disagreements, misunderstandings, and mistrust. Working there, we were trying to build something bigger than anything we’d ever seen, trying to keep something together that was probably too big to be contained. It felt like trying to harness the wind. A week earlier I had been to the funeral of a friend’s partner, a Black woman just a handful of years ahead of me in her forties. She’d died suddenly, tragically, from heart failure. A beloved chef, she had cooked for everyone’s retreats, weddings, and fundraisers, and the outpouring of love and grief shown in return was beautiful and profound. At her funeral I quietly promised myself I’d make an appointment to see the doctor. I’d had chest pains for the last month that had begun to trouble me. When I was facilitating conflicts or on late-night emergency phone calls, my chest would tighten and radiate like a violent sunburst coming from my heart. Despite all my training as a bodyworker, despite knowing better, I’d grit my teeth and try to ignore it until the wave passed. I believed, as we all did, that what we were doing at BLM was contributing to our freedom. That to get there we just had to endure these immediate challenges, the internal disagreements, and the external barrage of threats. As one of the organization’s healing practitioners, I thought that if I could find enough compassion in me, could open my heart wide enough to consume some of the pain and rage we all felt and directed toward ourselves and one another, we might then find a way to stay together, to trust one another enough to disrupt the systems that seemed hell-bent on killing us. But sitting at the funeral, tears in my eyes, hearing stories about our friend’s life and the grief her absence opened up, I knew that I needed to pay attention to the pain in my chest. That my body was communicating to me about my limits. I was being asked to listen even if part of me was afraid to hear what my body was saying. The next week I found myself at the doctor’s office, sitting on the edge of an examination table explaining those pains and shortness of breath to the nurse. If I’m honest, I only half listened to her, watching out of the corner of my eye as my phone lit up with messages from our organization’s text thread. An incident there was escalating, and we were all struggling to determine what to do and how to respond. I was searching for a solution that would settle things down. Even as a doctor hooked me up to an EKG machine, I was frantically, though apologetically, texting with my colleagues. It was only when the doctor returned with a clipboard and a worried look that I put down my phone. She sat across from me and with one of those weighted doctor tones asked me again to describe the pain I’d felt. “Have you been experiencing any more stress than usual?” she asked. “I feel stress constantly,” I answered, stone-faced. “Well,” she said, “the EKG results show that you’ve had a heart incident.” “What does that mean?” I asked, suddenly starting to wish I’d taken Kasha up on her offer to come with me. “It could have been an injury, some kind of blunt force to your heart,” the doctor said with a tone of regret. “Or a small heart attack.” I was thirty-six and terrified. The immediate prescription was time off from work and further testing. I spent most of the next few weeks at home resting, staying away from my phone. Lying down, I could hear the adrenaline coursing through me still, whirring in my ears. I startled easily, found myself worked up over minor things, agitated, playing out worst-case scenarios in my mind. I was detoxing from all the stress I had been operating under. I started seeing an acupuncturist as often as she would take me. The first time there I lay stomach down, a million needles bristling in my back, and ugly-cried into the face hole of the table. I decided right then that I needed to leave the organization and stop working for as long as we could afford. I had been going so hard, trying to respond to internal and external conflicts, trying to keep everything and everyone together, that I hadn’t listened to the warning signs of my own body. I hadn’t remembered that everything we experience is experienced in our bodies, that stress exacts a toll that is, too often, collected from our organs and life spans. I had also missed one of my own key facilitation points, that conflict is a teacher we would do better to listen to. In wanting to stop all conflicts from happening and make sure everyone else was okay, I had become a victim of my attempts to keep the peace. The law of entropy tells us that everything eventually falls apart. Despite our best efforts, our good intentions, and how much we’ve healed, whatever we build—our relationships, our organizations, our families, even the society we have come to know—can and will break down. What we assume is ordered will become disordered. Some moments in history are rife with conflicts. This is one of them. Not only are we having conflict, but conflict, it seems, is having us. Grinding us up and spitting us out, disconnected, demoralized, and enraged. On a societal level, conflict is teaching us a lesson we have not yet figured out how to learn. That sometimes we would do better to allow crises to destabilize us, to accept them and listen to them more, or at the very least not resist them so fervently. Instead, most of us do what I did. When we find ourselves in conflict, we fight against it in the name of maintaining some flimsy version of control over the situation. We do everything we can to protect ourselves, to identify and defend against the other side that has solidified around our disagreements. We fight until we feel sufficiently right, or good, or until we have exhausted the other, or we run to find the nearest exit. But what seems to be true is that conflict does not disappear just because we want it to or because we hide it away. When we choose not to deal with it, it can remain alive in our relationships and in societies, an acidifying, molten undercurrent waiting to erupt. We can have unresolved conflicts from childhood, a box of crayons stolen by a sibling, that anger us far into adulthood. And we can live in suppressed and unresolved societal conflicts that remain intractable for hundreds of years. Conflict sticks around until we get it. And when we do, it offers us an opportunity. In thousands of hours of facilitating conflict over the years, I have come to understand that every conflict holds something, a message, a lesson, for us. Inside of every conflict is something that we can use—but most of us never fully realize this, especially when we’re caught up in the heat of discord. This is not to say that everything we do in conflicts is justified, just that their existence is an opportunity to learn something new, if we know how to find it, about ourselves, one another, and the world. I wonder if we think we know about conflict already because we consume it all the time. We entertain ourselves with fights. The sports we play and watch are skillful, rule-bound conflicts in action, and the plotlines of many reality TV shows depict wealthy people in perpetual disagreement assaulting one another at dinner parties. Our national politics and our engagement with it are some of our least skillful displays of conflict, as evidenced by comments sections all over the internet, dumpster fires of regurgitated and vitriolic talking points. Conflict is everywhere but rarely do we see examples of it doing anything other than intending and causing destruction and pain. This nonstop consumption of conflict is a by-product of the collective anxiety we feel as we face uncertain and high-stakes futures. Escalating climate change and technological and political tensions heighten every collective decision we must make. Paradoxically, conflict entertainment is a distraction from these decisions and from deep, sustained engagement with our shared issues. It might be that we try to trap conflict in our screens, entertaining ourselves with others’ misfortunes because we are trying, as I was, to keep conflict under control. But pretending that conflict is only entertainment just underprepares us for its inevitable arrival in our own lives. Malidoma Patrice Somé, the late spiritual teacher and author, once said of conflict that it is the nature of a relationship asking to deepen. I find this to be so true. It is a natural part of any living system. It’s one of the ways we discover together our differences in belief, approach, and needs. It can help us move from one stage to the next. Just as the seedling pushes against its casing. The teenager argues for freedom. A couple begins to disagree over the smallest things after having a child. Relationships show their edges and change. Conflict isn’t an anomaly or a personal failure, nor is it an indication that a relationship is bad at its core. It is mostly the surfacing of the unconscious, what we don’t yet know, and what we’ve suppressed. We can expect it to arise whenever people come together to try to do anything at all, as our needs and interests will and do brush up against one another’s. It’s as common to our personal relationships as it is to our work in the world. What’s understood as allyship is often being willing to step into conflicts that we may have otherwise avoided or not noticed. Conflict is not only natural to us; it’s needed for change. When our team at the Embodiment Institute hosts healing retreats, we often joke that the third day of any course is “conflict day.” On the first day, everyone is too nervous and protected to be anything but polite. By the second day, people are comfortable enough with one another to start to self-reflect, to feel scary new feelings. And the third day is when people start to bump up against one another. When they take the risk to say what they really feel, or try to interrupt their people-pleasing tendencies. It can start to feel like a family gathering once the niceties have fallen away. Inevitably, the results are conflicts of all sizes. How we move through them together shows people how possible it is to have conflicts in their own lives, perhaps their own families, and to stay in relationship. That the two can exist together. It’s a learning for all of us in making room for the unplanned. WHEN I LEFT BLM, I took some much-needed time off to rest and recover and, honestly, to grieve. The cardiology tests were, in the end, inconclusive, though I knew with some certainty that my heart had been broken somewhere along the way. I cried every day over what I saw as my failures and missteps and the mistakes I’d seen from others. But as I came to terms with what had happened I was able to see the lessons more clearly. Lying in bed, I dissected and put back together every single breakdown I’d been a part of, facilitated, or witnessed. I read books and listened to talks from mediators and facilitators who worked on international conflict and war, wanting to understand why conflict could go so quickly from an opening to an impasse, one that could take years for people and organizations to recover from. What were the factors that created conflict, and what contributed to them feeling so intractable? Over the years, I have seen conflict tear people apart and dissolve the work they had intended to do. But, on occasion, I’ve also seen conflict bring people closer together, strengthen what they were trying to build. What were these moments of revelation and honest connection inside conflict made of? How had we created them? What made one conflict generative, moving us toward understanding, and another caustic? How could we engage in conflict while minimizing the harm it could bring? What did we need to know and do to get to the other side? Early on in my career doing couples therapy, I learned something that I came to see as a theme of generative conflict. At first, when I asked a couple why they had come in, they started to show their conflict dance to me: how they each saw the conflict, how they defended themselves in it, and how they reinterpreted the incident to protect themselves. They described their issue, some painstakingly, as though more details would naturally cause me to acquit them and convict their partner. And their partner was always at fault. I only get pissed off because of what she does. He stays on his phone all day. They make me feel like I don’t matter. I listened to their accusations. What were they really trying to say, and what were they really trying not to say? I’d offer their words back to them, restating what I’d heard in a way that defanged their statement. I’d try, “So what I hear you saying is that you are worried that she doesn’t desire you anymore?” Or “Are you saying that you need more space? It also sounds like maybe some resentment has been growing because you’ve had to put their needs before your own? Is that close?” Often, they’d return a relieved yes when they felt resonance, and most times, though not every time, their partner would drop their shoulders or offer, “I didn’t know you felt like that.” There is always something that we are most afraid of saying, the truth we protect at all costs. For interpersonal conflict to be productive, the key is finding this dangerous truth and creating enough safety that people can be vulnerable enough to say it. I sometimes think about conflict like this: At the very center is a gem, or, like in a video game, a set of wings or special shoes that make it easier to get where we have to go next. A prize that can only be retrieved by doing the very thing we feel least compelled to do, the thing that may not even occur to us as a viable option when we are in the eye of the storm. We can only win that very special, very needed gift when we allow ourselves to be vulnerable, despite the threat we feel. When we say what’s truest for us, often whatever it is that makes us feel small, afraid, and as though we’ve relinquished the control we thought was holding everything together. If, in conflict, we’re able to listen from a relaxed and undefended body to what is being shared and reflected back to us, then something alchemizes. We’re given access to our learning then, when we can reveal the wound that needs to be addressed. Sometimes we resist the lesson, and we’re haunted instead by past traumas retelling an old story in new circumstances. Very often we move into old ways of operating, protecting ourselves from perceived threats or danger. We can get stuck in time until we can learn and receive what is trying to make itself understood. For my own sake, I wish it were different, that we could stay defended and still get the message. No one has tried to avoid opening up more than me. But in all the conflicts I’ve been in and around, I’ve never seen anyone get their lesson out of conflict without offering a little something they were afraid to give in return. A couple of years ago, I was asked to facilitate a gathering for an organization, with regional chapters meeting together to devise their strategy. At one point I asked the room to divide into regions so that they could compile their victories and challenges and share back with the larger group. After most groups had gone off with their rolls of butcher paper, I noticed a gathering in the corner where people seemed distressed. A member broke off and came up to me. “Um, we’re having a problem in the Midwest.” I took a breath and headed over. As soon as I walked up, I saw that it was not exactly one group, but two camps split, each orbiting around an angry person in the center. I’ll call them Vickie and Bea. Lines had been drawn, and each side mumbled accusations. The women in the center mirrored each other, doing their best to look both disgusted and unbothered. I took each woman to one side and asked them to tell me the story of how we’d gotten to that moment. It turned out Vickie was angry that earlier in the retreat Bea had publicly criticized her and not privately pulled her aside. Bea was upset that Vickie had dropped the ball significantly at work and left others to pick up her slack. They were caught in a cycle of blame. I sat everyone down, shared the story back as I had come to hear it, taking care to connect with them while I spoke, creating a bridge between them even as they sat across the table scowling. “A couple things stood out to me that I want to reflect back to you both. What I heard from Vickie was that you, Bea, are her mentor, and bringing feedback to the large group embarrassed her.” Bea started to explain Vickie’s mistake at work before I interrupted. I promised we would get to that, asked that she trust me to return to it. I wanted first for Vickie to explain how she saw Bea. Vickie’s tough exterior started to melt, and her voice trembled. “I never had a mentor before. I’ve just been on my own, but she took interest in me. She’s so smart that she made me feel like I was worth something for the first time. I wanted her to be proud.” Looking over, I saw tears had started to fill Bea’s eyes, too. “What are you feeling now?” I asked. “I see myself in her,” said Bea. “It’s like looking in a mirror. I’ve been hard on her because being hard on myself was how I got here.” Suddenly air entered the room, jaws relaxed, and much-needed words were spoken. I asked Vickie about the work she had promised. “To be honest,” she said, “I didn’t know how to do it. I felt dumb, like it was proof I shouldn’t be here. So I just hid.” “What’s your responsibility to this mentorship relationship?” I asked. “What’s your part?” “I guess to ask for help when I need it,” Vickie offered. We spent the next half hour creating some structure to their mentorship, some agreements and some timelines for improvement for them both. At the end they embraced deeply. Both had learned more about what they were hiding, the insecurities it brought up in them to need and be needed by each other. Their self-protection kept them from growing, kept them from clarity on what was working and what wasn’t. It kept them from retrieving what was positive and useful in the conflict that they could put into action to deepen and develop their relationship. We can tell so many stories of the benefits of being vulnerable, but there are good reasons why we don’t start there or that we don’t get there at all. For one, vulnerability feels and can be dangerous. It exposes us, our fears and our desires, to other people. Sometimes the people we are in conflict with aren’t safe, and sometimes we assume that no one is. That shaky feeling we get when we ask for help or step up out of hiding and into leadership is our bodies’ warning that we are entering new and unfamiliar terrain and we are not sure how to stay protected. Most of us struggle to admit when we’re scared, and a good number of us are scared most of the time. That fear we carry, the fear that we have gotten so accustomed to that we no longer recognize it as baggage from the past, enlarges and inflames the content of every conflict. When I live most of the time afraid for my life, your oversight, our misunderstanding, can very easily feel like imminent death, even if it is not. For a long time, I identified as strong. I could remain outwardly poised under tremendous amounts of pressure. I could keep things moving despite being tired or demoralized. I could take on others’ emotional needs without breaking down around my own. The tropes of the strong Black woman and man are a story we tell ourselves that comes directly from realizing that somehow we are still here after centuries of oppression. It’s a way to recover some of our dignity after generations of violence, humiliation, and fear. But the cover, the hardening, that we call strength is not just evidence of our survival. It also disguises a terror that comes from knowing that many people have not survived and that there is an unresolved cruelty growing just below the crust of our society. We are afraid to be caught off guard, to be exposed, but that same fear keeps us from being known and from moving through conflict. This fear, grounded as it is, does not preclude the truth that vulnerability is the portal through which conflict is transformed and transforms us. Fear is the reminder that our lives are precious and precarious. We hurt, we crave to be seen, valued, we despair and need one another, and we need separation sometimes, too. We are vulnerable in these lives. But we struggle to say these truths in conflict. They show how soft we are underneath our defenses. Instead, conflicts escalate because our armor prevents us from sharing these feelings that make us feel small and exposed or because another’s armor tells us it is unsafe to do so. In conflicts, we believe it’s risky to lay down our protection knowing that in that moment of vulnerability we can be hurt and disappointed, but there’s risk, too, in not being vulnerable, in knowing that there is no way through the conflict to the lesson without it. Sometimes we wrap our tender fears in judgments and in blame, punishing someone for making us bare our chests, holding tight the apologies that are ours to say until the other person shows they are worthy by apologizing first. We try to make people feel the pain we’ve felt, though we know somewhere in us that vengeance makes us insatiable. Another’s pain can never relieve our own. Other times, we use shaming as our primary emotional tool. But shame impedes change. It just does. I know the fear and powerlessness that cause us to use it with one another, but that doesn’t make it effective. “Let’s put trying to make them feel bad aside for a second,” I’ll say to couples. “Say what it is that you feel. Say what you need. Say what you are afraid to say. I’ll be here with you.” When we share our fears and concerns, when we are vulnerable, that is when we make it possible for the longing inside our conflict to be known and satisfied, or at least we find out if it can be. WHENEVER I’M IN CONFLICT, and I have been in my fair share, it makes me, my body, suddenly unpredictable. I am shaking, hot, there’s an energy and movement in me that I feel is pumping, preparing me to do things that most times I’d rather not. At work, more times than I can count, when I’m facilitating a particularly intense moment, someone will look up at me almost pleadingly to confess, “I don’t know why I’m crying.” Or “I need to get out of here before I lose my shit.” Conflict has a way of undoing us, of stretching us beyond our contained bodies, the shape that we usually identify with and feel safe in. Any pretense we may still hold that we are civilized, purely intellectual beings, above animal emotion, is threatened by the wild and desperate responses in our bodies when we are accused, dismissed, or challenged. It is uncomfortable to feel the range of emotions that exist when we are in conflict. But we can’t leave the body or the feeling out. They are our guides. We already know that our bodies know how to defend. For example, when reading this you may have the ability to distinguish between an argument with your friend who is not showing up for you in a breakup and a life-or-death situation, but in the midst of that real-life scenario, when your friend lets you down, your body may register their behavior as abandonment and act in all the ways we might when we are afraid that we are being left behind to die. In conflicts our survival instincts get activated. It serves us to know this as we navigate crises, rather than to pretend that our bodies and emotions are not part of the equation. We can learn how to feel and listen to our bodies’ reactions without acting them out or becoming them. We can let the emotion inhabit us, inflame us, and ask it, What are you protecting? What are you most afraid of? What do you need me to know? This encourages our bodies to show us what is at stake, how they are choosing protection, and helps us to act accordingly. Maybe we’re in a situation we should leave rather than try to make it work. Or maybe it’s worth taking a break so that we can return more processed through our own feeling and more capable of truly listening. More often than not, when we create safety for ourselves just by listening, our bodies will offer up our truth. We might find in our inquiry into our bodies’ reactions that we are afraid that this conflict is just like another we barely survived. That some of the charge of the past animates the present. Often the scale of our reaction and how imminently we perceive the threat directly correlate to how much residue we hold from the past and how much or how little healing we’ve done. Our past can maintain a hold on us that amplifies slights and misattunements, that judges events as crises even when they are not. When we know this, we can be curious about how much of an emotion we feel belongs to this time, to this conflict, and how much comes from another time. This can help us focus on the issue at hand while letting us see that we have other emotions that need to be processed through a different route. Conflict can make us very unsure, and a body threatened craves certainty. This can affect the way we respond. I remember an argument from years ago when a girlfriend asked why I kept comparing her to people in my past. I’d start sentences with “I know what you’re going to say because everyone always …” “Hey,” she’d say, “you’re not dealing with whoever that is right now. We have never gone down this road together.” That simple reframe changed my practice; somehow, it made me feel safer in the unknown of conflict. Why project outcomes when instead I could see what was possible in this configuration, this time? When we’re in those heightened states of reactivity, we often need the world to become black-and-white, binary, good and bad, so that we can move and defend decisively. So that we can state our position clearly, draw our line in the sand. But nuance lives in feeling; it lives in the body. And when we are able to hold and explore nuance in a situation, it leads to more precise actions. We see that contradictions can exist alongside one another, and we can hear and take in other perspectives. We can hold multiple motivations and truths in our core and live with that stewing of complexity until the next right action shows itself to us. Frequently, we come to conflict more concerned with who is innocent or guilty than with what happened, what we need to understand, and what needs repair and attention. I get asked to facilitate people through conflict, help them find a way to agreements and understanding. I find that when the process starts, people plead to me as if I were a judge, trying to make the case for their innocence and the other party’s guilt. Innocence is safety while guilt leaves them at risk for expulsion and isolation. Neither innocence nor guilt can describe a person, as they are not identity traits or accurate descriptors of who we are in relationship, and yet we treat them that way. Many times, as I’ve supported people in wading through hard feelings, hurt feelings, I’ve found that they are not grasping for understanding, but for the safety of innocence. For an independent party to give them reprieve so that they don’t have to look further, feel more, or understand themselves. We do everything we can to avoid being charged as guilty—we stretch truths, obscure intentions, omit information, and build alliances to prevent any perception of culpability, none of which gets to the cause of the conflict or the possible ways through. At the foundation of this innocence/guilt binary lies a simple belief that we cling to, that the world divides itself neatly into good and evil, though it is on us to discern who fits into which category. In an attempt to do so, we simplify our world, make a lazy sense of it, taking shortcuts with good and evil and assigning them identities and characteristics. We assume that some people are good while others are predisposed toward an indomitable badness, with history playing an important role in these assumptions. Colonization, for example, codified whiteness, maleness, and able-bodied Christians as the standard of goodness, rightness, and the way people should be in a civilized society. This story set those with these so-called attributes against the indistinct dark masses. The darker you are, the closer you are to nature, the more dangerous, the more criminal, the worse you can be assumed to be. The binary is fixated on reinforcing itself, so it disappears the existence of the so-called middle, the people who don’t fit in either predetermined category. And the binary misses what is complex in each of us. Innocence, as our society uses it, is not a concept created for true safety and care. It is mostly a way to safeguard against responsibility. At times, white people in the United States have been found innocent of crimes against Black and Indigenous people, the wealthy found innocent of crimes against the poor, corporations found innocent of crimes against people, water, and soil. For poor people, especially Black and Brown people, legal innocence is a less frequently awarded prize. For them, innocence is the benefit of the doubt, the far-reaching extension of humanity and compassion. If a young white kid sexually assaults a girl he knows, his legal innocence is the guarantee that his mistakes won’t destroy his future (though there are no guarantees about hers). He is fundamentally good, just temporarily wayward. If a young Black boy commits a petty theft, we wouldn’t be surprised if he were shot by police outside his mother’s home. In such a society, in which innocence and guilt have no objective value, a justice system and a belief system that award and seek innocence and guilt do everyone in them a disservice. And yet we still use these systems to arbitrate our conflicts, whether interpersonal or societal. When we strive toward proving our innocence, we protect ourselves from really understanding our roles. No matter who we are, when we construct an identity that has to be good or right, we banish our shadows and our depths. James Baldwin said, “People who shut their eyes to reality simply invite their own destruction, and anyone who insists on remaining in a state of innocence long after that innocence is dead turns himself into a monster.” 1 What if we could do something different from having innocence and guilt at the core of our conflicts? To give up on this binary is not to erase the fact that we often hurt one another in conflict—very much the opposite in fact. We do hurt one another and sometimes in ways that are brutally unilateral, for reasons that have nothing at all to do with one another. We destroy parts of other people on a memory we can’t shake or a feeling we can’t tolerate. It happens every day. We enter conflicts unaware of the baggage we bring and how we inflict it on one another. And yet, innocence doesn’t stop this and won’t heal us. Neither will guilt. It only immobilizes and isolates us further, and the unresolved hurt and resentment simmer inside us, waiting to erupt in our next disagreement. Instead, what changes us are the processes of making amends, of incorporating another’s reality into our own, of knowing ourselves, our motivations, of being in practice that interrupts our unconscious and violent flailing. What changes us is vulnerability, acknowledgment, and responsibility. Designations of innocence and guilt too often get in the way of repair. What if, in resolving conflicts, we could move out of binaries and into a culture of accountability? Where we are proactively responsible for our actions and relationships. Where we are true to our internal values so that we don’t need to be found out and called out to admit or address when we’re wrong. Instead, we offer accountability because we are unsettled by our own actions or words. What if, instead of innocent and guilty, we could see ourselves as both harmed and harming, more or less honest, more or less able to be conscious when triggered, more or less manipulative, more or less caught in patterns, more or less willing to take responsibility for our own change? Could we then tend to the pain that is created in our breakdowns, instead of imagining that our denial and accusations will produce care and repair? Can we encourage all of us to learn inside of conflict and transform because of its occurrence? I’m left with a question that I haven’t yet been able to answer: What will it really take to believe in our and others’ ability to change? Maybe the most direct question is: How do we begin to create this culture when there have already been so many betrayals? Uprisings that spark movements for justice like Occupy Wall Street, #MeToo, Extinction Rebellion, #BlackLivesMatter, and #MaunaKea have been happening with greater frequency over the past decade or so. I imagine we could expect them to continue and grow as long as so many of us remain in denial about the needs and pain of others, unwilling to change and unskilled in addressing conflicts small and large. The conflict that an uprising or a protest shows us is the visible breakthrough, a rupture in an ongoing pattern of oppression, and presents an opportunity for our society, its systems and institutions, to reckon with the experiences of the people within it, and to envision accountability that can change all of us. These public ruptures are a timeless human phenomenon, as people gather and revolt to show us the urgent need for change. The resistance to them, the reactionary forces that come, can make it seem impossible that we’ll ever build a society capable of transforming conflict into meaningful learning rather than trying to suppress it altogether. But as Frederick Douglass once said, 2 “This struggle may be a moral one, or it may be a physical one, and it may be both moral and physical, but it must be a struggle. Power concedes nothing without a demand. It never did and it never will.” A living society, one that doesn’t doom itself to what it can’t face, has to find a way to listen to the heart of movement. Things fall apart but sometimes they are falling apart to show us who we were in the first place. Vulnerability can teach us, but it’s necessary to have a culture that rewards rather than punishes it. A culture that encourages our tenderness more than it shames us. We can create these cultures in pockets, experiments in trust and revealing and repair. In our homes and organizations, in places where we can more safely see ourselves in process, as change itself, and we can see one another with the same potential for transformation. When we live like this, we’ll see that conflict is not to be feared. We can fall apart and come back together all the time if, at our core, we believe in our development, that we grow, deepen, and mature. Really living our values decides the next shape we take.