3 Feeling and The Body I touch my own skin, and it tells me that before there was any harm, there was miracle. — ADRIENNE MAREE BROWN, Pleasure Activism: The Politics of Feeling Good SOMETIME AROUND THE AGE OF TWENTY-SEVEN, I RELEARNED how to cry. I’d hardly ever seen anyone in my family cry. My mom I’d seen fewer times than I could count on one hand and my dad I’d caught only once, when walking by a door cracked open. Every kid where I’m from knew that crying was not tolerated. “Stop crying before I give you something to cry about!” On cue to that refrain you learned how to suck the air back into your chest and swallow the emotion whole. You fixed your face so as not to show any signs of fear or pain. I never knew why exactly it was so enraging to see us be small or fearful, to see how we really felt. But I learned the lesson so well that even as an adult, when my eyes welled up, I unconsciously absorbed the tears back in. I covered over the feeling of sadness or fear so quickly it was almost like it was never there. One day, my therapist noticed this trick during a session. “What does stopping yourself from crying take care of for you?” she asked. “I don’t know,” I said. “I guess I’m putting myself back together because I think I’ll get hurt if I feel upset.” “Mm-hmm,” she said and scribbled in her notepad. “And what’s the cost,” she asked, looking up, “of stopping the tears?” I thought about it and got that uncomfortable feeling you get when something you pride yourself on shows you that it’s really a coping mechanism of a scared child. “Well,” I said, “I don’t think I really get to know how hurt I am, and I just end up holding on to it.” There it was. It all connected, and I realized what I’d been doing. Of course, if you had asked me if crying was healthy, I likely would have told you it was. But just after that session, in the car, the sadness I felt from realizing how much I’d not allowed myself to feel hit me, and almost as soon as the tears started to form, they dried up, just as they always did. Knowing that I was suppressing my tears wasn’t enough to allow them to come. Around that time, I was hanging out with a group of friends talking about playlists of our favorite sad songs, breakup songs, or songs that could make us want to cry just from the first chord. I got the idea then to compile the saddest playlist I could imagine and take myself and my songs on a date, a crying date. I booked a private hot tub for an hour one night that week. With headphones on, I repeated, “I’m safe enough to feel what needs to come.” I lay back in the warm water. Twenty minutes in, Sade started singing “King of Sorrow,” and I started to cry. Immediately, I felt the impulse to suppress the tremor but instead relaxed the muscles in my face and chest, and took a deep breath, allowing the waves to pass through me. The cry dropped past my diaphragm abruptly and into my belly and came out in a convulsive, shoulder-shaking sob. I was flooded with memories of crying, being immediately told not to, and the dull ache of those same cries that, it turns out, had been there all along, waiting for an opportunity to release. I sobbed all the way through Leonard Cohen, Donny Hathaway, and the whole rest of the playlist. In the end, I was spent, my body somehow more surrendered to gravity, but somehow emotionally lighter than I’d ever been. I had retaught my body how to cry. For at least the next year, I’d book a cry date whenever I felt myself get backed up—a heaviness in my body was my sign that there might be something I was holding. Later in the hot tub, I’d be surprised that a sideways comment a friend had made a week or two before or a moment of loneliness I’d felt would be lodged right there in my chest. Eventually I learned to sense the urge to cry, and even if in the moment it wouldn’t release, I could lure it out later, safe under a pile of blankets with my headphones on. For healing to take place, for it to be felt, for it to root, remake, and rearrange us, it has to happen not only in the realm of our thinking, but in the soil of our bodies. Healing has to be embodied. When I teach courses on embodiment, this is where I begin: inviting us to become reacquainted with our bodies that are undeniably near, yet these days can seem so faraway and unfamiliar. Embodiment is, not so secretly, the principle at the center of this book. For years, we have tried to outsmart our bodies, override them, and ignore them. That feeling my clients have had of late, an uneasiness, a discordant tone I feel in myself, too, is an indicator that our best intentions and even our best politics have not created in us the kind of change we long for and need. We know somewhere in ourselves what is fractured in us and our world and that the necessary redirection of our species will not be achieved by a change in just our thinking or only through our smartest ideas. It won’t be a performative change either. Instead, this change that we are called toward requires something of us that is radical and relational, cellular and generational, that brings us closer to one another and is measured in the very feeling of our lives. The word “embodiment” is used in a couple of different ways. It can refer to what it is that we’ve learned to do, the skills and habits, the ways of being, that live in us, that we’ve embodied over time. Brushing your teeth doesn’t require you to think it through each day because you’ve practiced it so frequently, but neither would your tendencies to people-please if that’s one of the lessons you’ve picked up over the years. Behaviors become automatic with enough repetition. Embodiment can also be used to describe our developing awareness of ourselves, our emotions and habits, and our ability to perceive sensations throughout our bodies. The more we can act from both our thinking and our feeling, grounded in our own felt sense, the more we might say that we are embodied. Here are some principles that guide me and that I’ll discuss at greater length during the chapter: • What we practice, what we do over time, can eventually become automatic; that is, it no longer requires our thinking to execute. We just do it. Something is truly learned when it is embodied (whether it’s riding a bicycle or having the capacity to trust someone). What we embody may be aligned or misaligned with our values or may be helpful or harmful to us as we learn and embody practices both consciously and unconsciously over time. • We can build our awareness of what it is we do automatically, how we do it, and how it came to be—which gives us the possibility to change. • We can increase our ability to feel our emotions rather than deny them and allow ourselves to feel what we deeply long for in ourselves and the world. • To transform and become who we intend to be more often, we have to practice being who we are becoming. These principles go against a lot of what most of us are taught about healing and change. We’ve been told that once we identify what’s wrong with us, we can fix it, and trade out one behavior for another. But knowing something alone does not produce changed behavior, and when we try to impose new ideas on a body that has its own logic and cares, they won’t last. When we approach our healing this way, we further separate the worlds of our thinking and feeling, and our failures open up a space where shame can live. It’s a setup. When we rely so heavily on our thinking as the sole basis for healing, we miss the resource, the wisdom, and the reality of our bodies. OUR SOCIETY TEACHES US THAT thinking is our most elevated function, our minds are the seat of rationality, and our thoughts are, therefore, impartial and trustworthy guides—much more reliable than the unpredictable, sensual animals that are our bodies. In the West, many of these ideas can be traced back to the roots of the Scientific Revolution. Francis Bacon, the British philosopher, forwarded the notion that relentless experimentation on the natural world is the basis for the knowledge of how things work. Physicist Fritjof Capra, in his book 1 The Turning Point, describes Bacon’s approach to science this way: “The terms in which Bacon advocated his new empirical method of investigation were not only passionate but often outright vicious. Nature, in his view, had to be ‘hounded in her wanderings,’ ‘bound into service,’ and made a ‘slave.’ … Bacon’s work thus represents an outstanding example of the influence of patriarchal attitudes on scientific thought.” Philosopher René Descartes introduced the concept of mind-body dualism, his theory that the mind and body are distinct and mostly independent entities. For better or worse, the thrust of his work gets reduced in the mainstream to his most memeable phrase: I think, therefore I am. Both Bacon and Descartes contributed to the mechanistic view of life that came into greater influence later through the work of Isaac Newton, an English physicist and mathematician, and that left an indelible impact on how we view and live our own lives. This foundational idea that anything in nature could be understood by taking it apart and that dissection and isolation could reveal the hidden logic behind everything propelled us forward scientifically, allowing us to classify the world, but it disappeared and diminished the role of relationship and context and our ability to see the connection between all living beings. If we were to look forensically for when we started to split ourselves into mind and body and to look at the world and one another as machines that could endlessly work, this is one such catalytic moment in time. Humans decided to conquer nature, no longer living as a part of it, or attuned to it, but becoming the masters of it. Just as the mind was split from the body, we were split from feeling, and ranked according to our association with the untamed world. Nature, womanness, the Black enslaved, and the Brown masses were all “bound in service” to a still-forming identity and class of the white and monied—who were in thrall to the advances of science and the seemingly endless reach of patriarchal intellect. Such a view of our own bodies and the natural world converts us all easily into objects when we relate to one another. If we treat our bodies like machines, as if they are only containers for our thinking, then our emotions, in their unpredictability, become the wild in need of conquering, too. And it would follow that if we do not feel or if our society views feeling as a failure, our culture might lose its grasp on what is truly humane. When we stifle our emotions by thinking that they’re too messy or inconvenient; when we measure our body’s value by its thinness and productivity; when we feel that we or people we know are undesirable or disposable because they are disabled; when we see the nonhuman natural world only as raw material for products to be consumed without end or renewal, we are operating inside a paradigm that dehumanizes and objectifies. So many people I’ve worked with have come to me because they can no longer get their bodies to do the things they want them to. Some want bodies that almost robotically perform life’s tasks rather than considering what their bodies might know, what they are trying to say, or understanding their bodies’ limits. Our bodies are much more than the fleshy vehicles for our brains, much more than objects for another’s desire, much more than cogs in a wheel. SOME YEARS BACK, I DID a podcast interview and the host asked when I first knew that I had a body. I hadn’t thought about the question before and I couldn’t provide a precise moment when I remembered waking up to my body, only times when it came more clearly into view through a capacity or limitation, or through feeling. It is hard to know you have a body in those early years of life, when you are so much a part of the collective, your family or community, that your own body can be hard to distinguish from the whole. But your own body is nevertheless there, recording, reacting, relating, expressing. One of my first recollections of bodies was being told that a body was something to cover up. So in one way, my body was first outlined to me according to which parts needed to be hidden. Later, when I crashed into a tree stump and flew over my bike’s handlebars, my body radiated with a global pain. And when I got older and my sexuality came on, my body was a furnace, fueled by a persistent new desire to merge with other bodies. My body was also connection. When I was in the fifth grade, my godmother died. She was, as I remember, one of those people who warms you without trying, whose laugh falls down on you, whose face was always obscured behind the billows of Newports. When she got sick, our house filled up with waiting, all holding our breath until my mother got the call and made the announcement that she was gone. The first loss of someone whose imprint I could still feel. I missed her immediately in the only ways I could as a child, as one less place to feel safe, one less adult hand on my back when I needed it. That same year a classmate’s brother killed himself during the World Series. I had met him once the previous year at my classmate’s birthday party. It was the first party I’d gone to in a wealthy or white home. The parents had turned the basement into a club for kids, with a shimmering disco ball hovering over the center of the room. I was excited to dance that night and surprise them all with my moves, but I never got to it. Walking into the party room, I was struck almost immediately with strobe-light-induced vertigo. Somebody caught me falling and my classmate’s mother took me upstairs to wait on the couch for my mother to retrieve me. The brother came then, perhaps assigned, perhaps not, to sit with me. Whatever the reason, he spoke to me, asked questions, seemed curious. I got the sense that he, like me, had a sadness that distracted him, that made him less concerned than the other boys with hiding his softness. When he died the next year, I replayed what was left of our conversation, two awkward children speaking across different but related chasms, without the words for what was in us. I lived long enough to find a name for mine and eventually to find a way, through my body, to some relief. But he didn’t. For about a month following the passing of my godmother and the boy, each night before bed I would play Michael Jackson’s “Will You Be There” from the Free Willy soundtrack I had purchased on cassette. Stomping, clapping, dancing. I spoke to my godmother in the dance and the tender boy who had sat next to me on the couch. I spoke to loss itself. I asked God every question in my dance, what happened to them, what would happen to me, what was happening around me, and why didn’t I have control. I spoke through my body to the nothingness, letting it devour me and birth me again. My body discovered new ways to move, and new meaning in the moves I already knew, a new/old language. Each night my dancing before bed was a ritual until the night when I didn’t need it anymore, until I had digested the grief and accepted it as a part of me. I didn’t realize it at the time, but this was the moment I discovered what my body knew how to do, and the moment I decided to live in it. Everything that happens happens in our bodies. Everything we feel, say, think, risk, every connection we ever have is experienced there. Our bodies are the expression and container of our lives. The tissues and muscles that can hold on to a trauma can also learn a dance, can live out a vision, can pick up a habit, can grow and age. It’s through our bodies that we experience and engage life, and it’s in our bodies that we heal. Our minds were once thought of as a creation solely of our brains, but recently psychiatrist and UCLA professor Dan Siegel defined them as an “embodied and relational, emergent self-organizing process that regulates the flow of energy and information both within us and between and among us.” 2 The mind is not just a function of our brains but a coordinated mapping that includes the information perceived and recorded by other parts of our bodies. Our best thinking happens as a full-bodied experience, because no matter how much we try to separate the brain from the body, it is irritatingly located there, inside of it, a part of the ecosystem that is us. There is a reality that our bodies connect us to. They grow, age, and eventually die. Our bodies join us with the cycles and laws of continual change that are true for all life. We protect and connect; we both expend energy and require rest. And our bodies are somehow a collection of living stories, too, of where we’ve been and where we come from, a profound record of our ancestors’ survival. An individual body, through its language, rhythms, needs, connects us to the body of our species, to the body of life around us, and to the great movement of life across time. Our bodies are made of this world, organized and pulsing stardust, and yet they each hold something precious and distinct that is uniquely us. Our bodies are the proof that we are alive and that we are here. Miraculously, too, our bodies feel. They respond to the world with emotion, the physiological sensations that happen when we encounter stimuli, both external and internal. We lose someone we love and are taken over with grief. Someone jumps out at us from around the corner and our bodies respond with fear. These emotions are involuntary, and they are universal in the sense that we all experience them. Feeling is the conscious allowance of emotions, letting them run through us so that we digest them and understand the messages they offer. When we deny this process and stop up feeling, like I stopped my tears, we are treating ourselves the way we might machines, and we lose the human opportunity feeling gives us to learn and grow. To deny the life of our emotions and the process of feeling is to deny how alive we are and how inseparably bound up we are with one another. Many years ago, I fell onto the path of somatics, which would eventually become the foundation of my work. The definition I was first given of somatics is that it is the study and practice of how change happens in bodies. The root word of somatics, “soma,” translates from Greek to “the body in its wholeness.” By this we mean the body in its physical sense but also as the place where we feel, where we sense, where we make meaning, and where we engage with the world. I see somatics now also as the study of our bodies, trauma, and the practices we generate to develop awareness of our bodies and transform them. I think of embodiment as related, but inclusive of all the practices, rituals, and ceremonies that people have used across time to transform not only individual bodies but our collective bodies as well. The ceremonies, dances, and songs that every Indigenous culture around the world has created for birthing, for death, and for grief, to prepare for battle and the changing of seasons. The rituals that give people in community space to heal and express, and where we sync our bodies with one another’s and feel the presence of what we share that lies beyond words. My first somatics training was in 2010 through Generative Somatics, an organization in the Bay Area whose mission was to train social change leaders in trauma and equip them with somatic practice in order to build more powerful social justice organizations. I was working as a fundraiser with one of the groups selected for the program. During the first session, I spent that initial hour of introductions terrified that I would show unexpected emotion in front of my co-workers. I steeled myself, tightening my body, and paid attention to not take too much in or, worse, let too much out. First, we worked on centering, a practice meant, in essence, to ground us. We started with scanning our bodies for sensations that the teachers described as the very language of the body, that the body was always expressing and responding. I noticed how challenging it was to locate my sensations. I was tracking so much outside of me. The breathing of the person next to me, the roaming eyes of the teacher. Next, they instructed us to soften the contractions in our muscles where, they explained, shame and trauma could lurk. We could take our bodies back from these experiences, reinhabit the places we’d abandoned. One of the teachers, Vassi, asked that we feel the edges of our skin, to breathe through our pores. It was a strange instruction. I had just started therapy, and I was still a long way from being comfortable with anything too abstract. I tried it anyway. I took a breath, exhaled. I immediately noticed how tight my ribs felt, like there was a rubber band around their base, how short and shallow my breath was as a result. The teachers encouraged us then to soften and expand the muscles in our chests, to make more room around our hearts, they said. I’d never considered the muscles in my chest at all, but I could feel that my chest was contracted, caved in, exactly around my heart. How long had it been like that? From the strength of the contraction, I could tell it was longer than just that day. It felt familiar, comfortable, and well practiced, even though I hadn’t known it just the moment before. I was suddenly in a new conversation with my body. What else was in there? Everywhere I carried my attention I could feel the quivering of a muscle that wanted permission to let go, or another that resisted, tightening even more under my curiosity. I tried to “breathe through my pores,” as instructed, and suddenly understood how far inside myself I had retreated. I couldn’t feel my skin at all. My whole body was bracing. In my mind’s eye, I saw an image of a tiny version of myself living behind a door deep in my chest, like one of those figures that emerges on the hour from a clock face. This was the control center of my life. For the first time, I realized that this was how I always felt. Here I kept myself tightly guarded and hidden, protecting what was most vulnerable from coming out and being hurt. The more I breathed deeply, the more the bracing threatened to give way, to what I had no idea. I glanced around to see if anyone else was feeling the way I was or if they could see me feeling. Had anyone else just had the volume on their sensations cranked up? My body was trying to tell me secrets that I hadn’t known how to listen to before. I looked up and saw the teachers at the front of the room, noticing the subtle ways their own bodies shuddered and shifted with each instruction. They were releasing and rearranging. They were feeling. It seemed so simple and natural to watch them do it, but my body would not surrender; the tightness wouldn’t let go. SOMETHING CHANGED FOR ME THAT DAY. I had started on a journey of discovering myself not as I tried to be, or pretended to be, but as I was. I learned that the places where my muscles tightened were contractions, which, in somatics, are seen as protective or reactive impulses that remain in the tissues. An unprocessed shock might show up in a contraction around the eyes, a constant startle. For me, a contracted chest was an impulse to contain myself, to stay small and hidden. Across our bodies, our muscles can tighten, pulling us in to protect or keeping us pushed out and defended against the world. These places can become anesthetized over time. Many clients I’ve worked with have had long-standing contractions in their chests, as I did, or in their jaws, their stomachs, or their shoulders, but their bodies no longer register the pain it takes to hold the contraction. The muscles and fasciae around them adapt, and the body fossilizes this protective imprint. It’s a remarkable example of how the body can learn and embody what it has practiced. If we don’t feel the fear or threat has ended, we hold on to the posture and, hidden within us, it can sabotage our lives. Unprocessed trauma or conditioning by our families or social expectations can cause our protective body to become our predominant way of meeting not only potentially traumatic moments, but any moment in which we perceive stress, even when there’s no real threat to our lives or bodily integrity. Our protective selves can show up when we get into a disagreement, when we are so afraid that we might be hurt like we once were, and our bodies can automatically go into an embedded fight stance as we find ourselves trying to injure another person with our words because we are afraid of injury. Or the stress of being loved, even as we’ve always longed for, can activate an automatic retreat. We might disconnect from the source of the love, afraid that we aren’t deserving or ready yet to meet it. Our bodies don’t interpret the value of the stress, good or bad, but if we assess something as stressful it can elicit these responses. When our reactive selves become the primary part of us that meets the daily stress of our lives, we put ourselves at a disadvantage, though we don’t realize it. Our protective bodies are made of quick actions that are helpful in life-threatening situations. They search for and identify danger and choose an immediate action based on what is perceived. But when overused they intercept our ability to be in this moment. The more we perceive the world as threatening, the more our reactivity will take hold of us, convincing us that it alone knows how to take care of us. But our reactions always answer to a memory. To the past as it visits our relationships and our lives in the present. What we need to feel, process, or learn now will be lost in our attempt to defend or protect. Reactivity is the mechanism of time travel that I discussed in the last chapter, taking us, though not consciously, out of this time. The more we are jolted into reactivity, the more we lose our grounding in the present moment as we respond to the vestiges of the past. This loss of presence is a loss of agency. If we are always caught up in responding to the conditions of another time, we are not able to respond as thoughtfully to the conditions of this one. My own reactivity protected me from past hurt, but it left me guarded even when what surrounded me was the acceptance I craved. I couldn’t even perceive that love could be there, let alone open myself up to it. Constant or frequent reactivity is unmooring. We are more susceptible to knee-jerk reactions, perceiving threat over opportunity, and, ungrounded, we become vulnerable to the certainty espoused by others, the certainty of the person who hypes our fear, perhaps of the dictator or pundit who uses our insecurity, tells us what to do with it, names our enemy, and instructs us in what we must do to protect ourselves. There is real danger in this moment, mounting political and ecological threats. But our ability to respond in grounded ways is warped by our culture’s hyperreactivity. The constant barrage of news intentionally activates our fear, perhaps because it is created from the fear of someone else, and the drum of social media sounds a relentless warning, fueled, on the whole, by our most reactive and addictive capacities. We live in a state of outrage that sparks and fades but never permeates our systems quite deeply enough to really change us or call us into sustained and meaningful action. Instead, our bodies are left defensive and often depleted. Whenever we receive information, the way we meet it and with which one of our bodies shapes what we are able to do with it. The question then is through what process can we soothe our reactions and allow ourselves to meet the challenges of this moment in full-bodied presence. THAT FIRST DAY IN A somatics class, standing there so afraid to feel, I saw suddenly how I lived in an almost constant state of reactivity and fear. How my body was holding protective contractions that kept my ability to feel my current emotions at bay. As surprising as it was to discover all the effort my body was making to armor me against threat, it hinted at the possibility that there was some other way, a yet unfamiliar but perhaps more expansive way of being in my body. I began to see that this possibility came through the act of feeling. It’s hard at times to explain what it is that happens when we feel. It isn’t exactly logical or linear. In some ways, the best explanation is spiritual for how softening the muscles in your chest can change how you breathe, the way you think, the things you say, the way your life feels. I worked with a practitioner who would wrap me up in a blanket and squeeze tight so that the muscles in my chest could finally release, trusting that I was still protected. Still armored. The emotions and memories embedded in those muscles rushed forward and out. As unorthodox as it might sound as a therapeutic approach, my tolerance for intimacy deepened almost immediately when those contractions started to loosen. I could stay vulnerable with another person longer before feeling the urge to protect myself and withdraw. The connections I began to make with the people I worked with qualitatively changed. Somehow with a softening chest, there was more room to listen to the concerns of my clients without rushing in to fix or know, less need to defend or assert myself, and much more empathy and compassion I could offer. When I work with clients, my job is not to tell them what they feel or what they should be feeling, but to create enough safety so they can surrender into letting their bodies feel. Most people need the explanation that our bodies already know what they need to do and how. It’s a kind of permission to allow what might feel or look weird or wild to come out. Our bodies know somewhere how to cry, how to tremble through fear; they know how to buck off big feelings when they need to; they know how to sink into an embrace. One woman I worked with, a high achiever who was sexually abused as a child, was unable to feel empathy for others because she hadn’t ever been able to tolerate the feeling of her own helplessness. After a few months of sessions, she allowed herself to be held by me as she sat, shaking, under the table, reliving that early fear. This time, instead of having to stifle what was there, she was able to feel what had gotten stuck inside, a frustration with her caretakers, the deep-rooted feeling that she had once been small and had needed an adult to really see her. As these emotions ran through her, she could also begin to feel the resources she had around her now, my companionship in the fear, and the love of her husband, who had supported her healing journey. Feeling allowed something inside her to integrate, and the self-compassion she was able to generate changed how she worked and her relationships with the people around her. To feel an emotion is to allow it and let it run through, to learn from what it is telling you about you, about your relationships. Feeling is a self-acceptance of your own emotions and the wisdom of your body. It is the root of the work I do with most of my clients. Make your question a quest. My therapist says this to me when I don’t know how to describe exactly what it is I feel. I know this means that I am holding on too tight for control. A significant part of feeling is not allowing ourselves to fall too quickly into naming or categorizing what we feel, but to allow and witness. Simply asking what an area of the body might say if it were held, or placing, consensually, a hand to support a place where someone feels a holding or contraction, most always elicits stories and more sensations. It can be tricky, though. Just as our avoidance of feeling can become our normal, we can try to live in emotions, or rather perpetually revisit them. Sometimes we can get stuck in a way of emoting, or focusing on emoting as evidence of feeling, and that can be its own means of hiding or avoiding another feeling buried even further underground. Authentic feeling is not performed nor is it summoned. Feeling is allowed. It is emergent. It is a listening that aligns us with our real indicators. Feeling grounds us. It is proof that we are alive. Numbing is one way that we protect ourselves from feeling something we are afraid to or are under-resourced to feel. Or that we may not have the support or time to feel. We numb with all the coping strategies we know: work, alcohol, drugs, sex, food, social media, and any other activity humans do that can be made into distraction or an eject button to leave our bodies. Numbing is an important option for us. Sometimes blunting or leaving our sensations is the best temporary solution. Sometimes alternative transcendent experiences, where we leave our sensations on purpose to join in another realm of consciousness, can offer us the opportunity to retrieve something we might not otherwise have had access to. Feeling itself needn’t turn into an obsession or another kind of supremacy. It is offered as a counterbalance to a worldview that denies its wisdom. It takes resource to feel. But what we think of as resource can be expansive. Human and animal relationships often provide resource for us to face what was previously unfaceable. If we are open to it, trees can help us feel; their steady strength can be an ally, a way to ease our fear. Feeling needs resource and gives us resource in return. Feeling is where nuance can emerge, where multiple and, sometimes, contradictory impulses can make sense inside of us. Where we can resist clamping down too quickly on who we are, what we think we have to believe, and let what is true to us reveal us to ourselves. Reactivity and the binaries of threat and safety limit what it is we are able to dream and experience in our lives. In our bodies, in feeling, are experiences not yet felt, sensations not yet known, and solutions we have not yet imagined. Feeling is revolutionary, a disruption to the status quo. Though it feels personal and happens in our bodies, it doesn’t need to be a solitary action. Feeling and connection bring us into the world and into relationship with one another. Some things seem too big to be felt alone because they are. They require the collective to hold the space for big feeling, for it to move through, and to remind us that we’re not alone. It’s not practical to imagine that we can feel the weight of historical trauma as one person. This is why we meet in the streets. As much as mass protests and direct action are about putting strategic pressure on opposition, they are often a gathering space for our grief and pain because they are too big to feel alone. Protests don’t get reported on this way, as an eruption of collective grief; on the news they are riots, and we begin the cycle of minimizing the feelings that bring people to the streets, and ultimately we miss the message. We need those spaces and others, too, where our grief can swell, where feeling for feeling’s sake can reconstitute us, where our empathy for one another can build. A community, a society, becomes one, remains one, I think, through sharing feeling. Somatics as a field of study appealed to me because it was a path to reanimating our bodies, reclaiming ourselves. It spoke to something in me as a Black person who had been taught in any number of ways that my own body was human-adjacent at best. That our culture, our dances, and our worship were uncivilized. I felt alive with my people, but it didn’t seem that our aliveness held value in the world, and sometimes even with us. But somatics has its own limitations. Its halls are decorated with brilliant teachers who have not always escaped the conditioning of their times. It has often borrowed from cultures while holding to the supremacy of its own. It has, until very recently, through the works of Resmaa Menakem 3 and others, had very little to say about culture and even less about what Brown bodies might already know, even when it has silently taken and repackaged the teachings and philosophies of Eastern martial arts or African dance. Somatics, in a way, is born from the original fracture that separates us all into feeling and non-feeling, wild and civilized. It’s a solution to a problem created when the mind was given supremacy. Nevertheless, it’s a necessary inquiry, a beautiful invitation to learn what our bodies know about healing and about social change. Studying somatics awakened in me the proposition that I might not need to tame my body. And if my body was wise, then maybe the bodies I come from were wise, too, especially in the ways we moved with one another, in song, how we could catch the spirit and become possessed with the very essence of God. Maybe there was wisdom in how I’d seen us lay hands on one another’s electrified bodies in church. There was a style, a reverence, and, yes, a rhythm that we’d refused to relinquish. And I started to wonder, as I studied somatics, if maybe it was exactly that, those elements of culture, that had gotten us through the worst of it. In the last several years, the question of ritual as embodiment, as healing, has called me. In my own culture, I could sense and feel remnants of previous traditions that have carried across time. There are mostly gaps, though, where we might have once had a ritual for birth, death, marriage. Rituals move us as a collective through these transitions. I can feel what we’ve lost. Ancestor Malidoma Patrice Somé once said, “We need ritual because it is an expression of the fact that we recognize the difficulty of creating a different and special kind of community. A community that doesn’t have a ritual cannot exist.” 4 As much as our individual rituals for healing open us up to connection, our collective practices, what we share, move constrictions out of our cultures and usher in change. Rituals are the churches without walls, the antidote to our denial. Feeling together can both bring us together and free us. Our society has gone through too many traumas while commanding that we deny our grief and our compassion. Our feeling of it all. Our processing of it and getting to the other side, bringing our new insight into ourselves along with us. I wonder at times if the trope of the dumb American could be understood as the unfeeling and reactive American, if the supposed stupidity is actually the consequence of emotional denial that, at this stage, has become feverish, delusional, antisocial. I wonder if the distinction matters. Mostly, I wonder if a value of feeling that interrupts that perpetual denial might create the opportunity to come down from the confusion of reactivity into the complexity, beauty, and challenge of taking on board and sitting with what has really taken place in our country and what can be done about it. Somewhere along the way we were taught to stop feeling instead of being taught to stop what harms us, as though the feeling were our enemy, as though the feeling were hurting us. To move forward and address the harm, we have to feel. As Audre Lorde said in her essay “Poetry Is Not a Luxury,” “The white fathers told us: I think, therefore I am. The Black mother within each of us—the poet—whispers in our dreams: I feel, therefore I can be free.”