Introduction to the UK Edition IN MARCH 2018, WHILE ON A TRIP TO LONDON, I WAS INVITED, along with a few other US-based community organizers, to visit Grenfell Tower. This was already nine months after the devastating fire that killed seventy-two people and displaced hundreds more, many of them migrants to the UK. Still the tower haunted, an imposing emptiness, hollowed of life. I remember how eerily quiet it seemed; its windows blackened eyes looking back at me. Paper heart cutouts draped the fence and underpass across the street. A makeshift memorial collected prayers for the lost and surviving. It had been a raging, rapid fire, I was told, that caused the carnage, but it was something else, which had settled over the building long before, that set the stage for that summer night. An absence of care, a neglect, by the owners of the building and local officials who had refused to heed the safety warnings, the pleas from the tower’s inhabitants. The organizer who’d brought us there led us around the corner from Grenfell to what was, on the outside, an unassuming building. Yet, inside was a space that vibrated with life. Children ran in and out through the maze of rooms, chasing one another and laughing. Against the walls were pallets filled with jars and boxes of food for families in need. We were shown rooms where survivors received free therapy sessions and we saw fliers inviting tenants to regular meetings there, where they could address concerns and organize. It was organic, flourishing with all that had been missing at the site of the tower. It was clear from the space that, somehow, their community was still there. Community, I wrote later in my journal, is made in part by proximity, the shared experience of living in one place, but it is also made of something much more ineffable. Community, at its core, is who you are willing to care about and for. Afterward, we sat down to lunch with some of the families who had survived that night yet still lived with the aftermath. They told us stories of uncertain living in hotels, the government’s continually delayed response, of feeling invisible and unheard, and the years of organizing by Grenfell residents that had predicted the eventuality of this disaster, even if they couldn’t prevent it. I was surprised. I had assumed, naïvely, that living in a country with nationalized healthcare, one that seemed to provide so many basic supports in contrast to my own, meant that people there had social safety nets. That some entity would step up on their behalf and provide for them when tragedy set in. With the fire, people had lost their homes, and with them their belongings. But not only those. They had lost their short commutes to work, their trusted schools, the heartfelt conversations with their neighbors, the grandmothers who watched their children when they had an errand to run. And, with the trauma of the fire ever present in their minds and their bodies, they had lost their ability to rest and recover. The community center had given them belonging, a place in the world to come together and just be. To talk and grieve, to remember, to move forward, to be heard, to demand safe housing, to say “Enough.” It was a place to heal. What I saw that day at Grenfell and in the building next door, I have seen replicated in my home country and around the world. When traumatic events or daily oppression implode lives, people ache to find a way to heal in communion with others. To heal by tending to our minds, bodies, and souls, and by transforming the systems that caused harm in the first place. When trauma impacts us—and it touches some of us with more frequency and force than others—we need to be held by these communities that nurture and sustain us. Wherever we call home, we have a front-row seat to mounting crises around the globe, from the economic to the existential. Wherever we look, we see fracture and polarization, and we feel overwhelmed. We don’t know how to respond, whether there’s something we can do, or if there’s any point anymore. It is in these times of discord that we must remember that, as humans, there is more that connects us than divides us. Our circumstances, our hardships, no matter where we live, bear an uncanny resemblance to one another’s, and instead of allowing them to drive us further apart, we need to find a path toward connection. Now, more than ever, is the time to commit to building a world where all of us can thrive, where we strive to understand one another, where we can tend to our trauma and push for more just systems and policies. A place where we create spaces for all of us to feel and breathe and flourish. A community of care. This is what it takes to heal.