6 Toward a Postcolonial Pastoral Theology W hen I returned to MoiKonde in the early stages of writing this book, I reconnected with a friend who had opened a new restaurant. A beautifully crafted wooden threshold, or limen, about a foot high, crossed the floors of the doorway. How could one not notice such a prominent barrier while walking through the door? The threshold, my friend said, reminds all who enter to do so intentionally. Those who try to run away without paying would likely trip on their way out. The foot-high wooden threshold is an apt image for the kind of liminal space in which creative spaces for understanding become more possible. Possibilities require intention, attention, and perseverance especially when craving retreat to the habitual practices of exclusion that keep us from understanding others and keep us from participating in the systemic change that supports liberative, empowering care practices and resists the strategic dehumanization that is a hallmark and legacy of historical colonialism. This chapter proposes revised functions of pastoral theology and a revised guiding image of care that can better account for our contemporary context of postcoloniality in which intercultural misunderstandings are the norm and mutual intercultural understandings are rarely sustained. In so doing, this chapter begins the constructive theological work necessary to move toward a postcolonial pastoral theology. As mentioned in the introduction, a single-authored book cannot do this work alone. Therefore, this book also serves as an invitation both to pastoral theologians and to students of pastoral theology to carry the conversation further in connection with your experiences of misunderstanding stories. My preliminary constructive work draws on the descriptive and methodological work of previous chapters. There I draw on the rich practice of ethnography as a responsible vehicle for a thick description of the postcolonial stories of misunderstanding that frame the book. These chapters recast and expand Victor Turner’s anthropological description of cultural crisis to make sense of mutual intercultural understanding as a process that necessarily includes layers of misunderstandings. Previous chapters included representational narrative fragments of intercultural misunderstanding stories structured according to a revised model of intercultural experience based on Turner’s work to depict just how complicated it can be to move from an initial awareness of misunderstanding toward a deeper and more mutual understanding. Pitfalls abound along the way. Desire not to understand meets desire for deeper understanding, both within myself and across persons and communities. Life together is complex. Through a conversation between lived experiences and interdisciplinary theories, I expanded the first two steps of a strategic practical theological method where human experiences—in this case misunderstanding stories—come into dialogue with histories, psychologies, and theologies to pave the way for constructive pastoral theology and recommendations for practice, although these have been alluded to along the way. 1 Modern psychologies have not only been culture-forming, 2 but they also continue to undergird histories with implicit dehumanizing representations. In previous chapters, I affirmed the nuanced tradition of interdisciplinary conversations as a site for theoretical innovation in relation to care practices because conversation among multiple voices facilitates possibilities of more mutual understanding in the face of cultural differences and histories of colonial violence. I evaluated identity crisis drawing on classical modern developmental psychology in conversation with postcolonial criticism of Western depictions of maturation. Through theoretical correlation between feminist psychology and feminist theology, I probed the exceedingly difficult challenge of sharing in mutual vulnerability, particularly in the midst of suffering, and given our human propensity toward domination and non-recognition. Through conversation between the modern post-Freudian theories of self-psychology and object relations theory and postcolonial psychology, I raised intercultural empathy as a question and challenge for pastoral theologians. Together, these chapters recommend necessary elements for a postcolonial pastoral theology relevant to the situation of postcoloniality in which we all live and move in relation to complex power arrangements. This book records stories in which I misunderstood and was misunderstood. Cultural differences played a tangible role in misunderstanding stories around norms of child discipline, private property, and communal conversation. International examples ought not diminish intercultural dynamics operating within seemingly more homogeneous communities right here at home. What misunderstanding stories have you experienced at home, abroad, and in the connections and disconnections between the local and global? We need to tell our misunderstanding stories as a pathway to expansive possibilities of mutual intercultural understanding. Misunderstanding stories challenge identity, complicate empathy, and blind us to appropriate vulnerability. They also invite deeper investment in practices of courageous self-awareness and sharing in vulnerability to mutual learning. Possibilities for intercultural understanding require openness to change: cultures are dynamic, always changing; through my participation and lack of participation in community, I am dynamic, always changing. How do we understand the role of tradition in paradigm shifts? Is appealing to modern theories relevant or even responsible in the face of postcolonial and postmodern concerns? I have framed the flow of chapters according to Turner’s anthropology of cultural ritual in which human beings move from a breach in intercultural understanding toward reconciliation by way of a process that includes identity crises and requires attention to communal practices of resolution. The process is not simply a linear progression; rather, it is dynamic, spiraling back and forth toward and away from recognition through the discipline of patience, self-awareness, and commitment to multiplicity in community. Liminality continues to be a crucial concept for understanding possibilities of change. Liminal space facilitates possibilities for second-order change, 3 or systemic change supported by sustaining courageous questions like: “Why are things broken the way that they are?” and “How am I complicit in the suffering that results from this systemic brokenness?” Change does not mean abandoning tradition for new possibilities emerging within and around us. Narrative theory and narrative theo-logy remind us that the desire to do so, while perhaps at times having noble intentions, is impossible to realize. There simply does not exist an entirely new liberative narrative totally disconnected from histories. Yet, unearthing, reimagining, and reframing describe narrative strategies for co-authoring change—always and everywhere in relation to the threads of our identities that have both knit us and unraveled us to this point. The histories of connections and disconnections complexly embedded in each narrative contribute to the awareness of just how courageous it is to claim our participation in facilitating and resisting the change going on in and around all of us all the time. For this reason, the proposals in this chapter draw on the rich history of pastoral theology with appreciation for the risky, courageous, and landmark nature of previous theoretical claims in previous times. Recognition of our contemporary context as postcolonial becomes a hermeneutical lens for critically engaging tradition. Revised Functions of Postcolonial Pastoral Theology Instead of fixed goals, I have argued for understanding the emerging functions of pastoral theology—empowerment, resistance, and liberation—as participatory processes that include understanding and misunderstanding in the form of empowering/disempowering, resisting/recognizing complicity, and liberating/being liberated. A participatory model of healing incorporates ambiguity, uncertainty, and misunderstanding as aspects of all relationships. Here Milton Mayeroff, a pragmatist in the tradition of John Dewey, can be a helpful conversation partner. In On Caring, 4 Mayeroff claims basic certainty as an orientation toward caring that “requires outgrowing the need to feel certain, to have absolute guarantees as to what is or what will be... it also includes being vulnerable and giving up the preoccupation with trying to be secure.” 5 We may think of basic certainty as a form of intercultural trust or vulnerability that require putting into question whether or not our care practices are in fact empowering, liberating, or resisting dehumanization. Possibilities of mutual intercultural understanding that resist colonizing explanation are participatory. Participation, in turn, requires sharing in vulnerability and trust, which as Nandy and Fanon so poignantly describe, have been abused as sites of violence. Participating in embodied empathic recognition unfolds in shared space claimed as liberative and empowering, but these goals must be enacted intentionally and with regard to histories and misunderstanding stories filled with dehumanizing representations. A postcolonial pastoral theology will employ tools of history, theo-logy, psychology, literature, and cultural criticism to portray a complex colonizer–colonized dynamic that continues to play out in we who live with this legacy. As part of this, we need to seriously consider the interlocking features of political and economic colonial consequences, including complex psychological, historical, theological, and literary dimensions of a less bounded, less definable, still comprehensively devastating colonialism. It is especially challenging to correlate and communicate best forms of caring and best ways of conceptualizing understanding across cultural differences because Western academics, theologians, ministers, community leaders, development organizations, and others of us passionate about healing have often adopted a top-down, salvation-oriented mindset lodged in colonialist structures that can frustrate rather than facilitate mutual intercultural interactions. 6 Practices oriented toward intercultural understanding become harmful when they limit access to participation in healing: it is not adequate to consider best practices of intercultural care as being directed solely by the caregiver. Our traditional patterns of giving and of theorizing care as giving are part of the problem. Theorists and practitioners of care alike need to face our vulnerability and tendency to misunderstand. A correlational analysis of intercultural misunderstanding invites diverse perspectives through co-authoring and co-participating that fosters mutual learning. 7 How do we participate in care while evaluating the consequences of our care habits? How do we resist harm when we do not know how to recognize harm? How do we come to terms with recognizing that familiar ways of caring may actually harm when we intend for them to heal? Reflecting on disruptive experiences highlights the significance of intercultural co-participation. Essentially, I am arguing for living into processes that intercultural misunderstandings provoke. Living into understanding as a process includes facing uncertainties, reflecting on questions of meaning, and consciously inviting disruptive experiences to affect both one’s interior life and spirituality, as well as to disrupt and expand relational networks. This is difficult to teach and difficult to learn (and keep learning). However, to patch up misunderstanding stories prematurely for the sake of securing a false sense of comfort restricts possibilities and thus colludes with colonizing orientations over and against other human beings. The strong desire for answers, normative conclusions, and prescriptive suggestions to put into practice contributes to misunderstanding stories. Moving toward postcolonial pastoral theology is, fortunately, more complicated than that and resides in a thickly textured tradition that often resists this idea of caring by attending suffering and facilitating healing as easy. Postcolonial pastoral theology invites diverse participation in processes in which I empower and I disempower. I am empowered and I am disempowered. I resist and I recognize my own complicity in the problem. I liberate and I realize that I am being liberated. As pastoral theologians and as practitioners of pastoral care, we must rethink our goals and methods around empowerment, resistance, and liberation. Misunderstanding stories evoke questions around the pastoral function of empowerment: How do experiences of intercultural misunderstanding embody power and resistance in historically sanctioned roles, memories, and sacred spaces? How do I hear and tell stories in a postcolonial context? Whose history explains the embrace of the Dutch and fear of United States Americans by Mia and Ella? Whose history is behind MaLespeki’s protection of sacred space against the white man? What is the function of gender here? How do power and position affect representations that then come to define what we think of as the actual past? How does the power of the gaze influence identity construction over time, from colonial pasts to hoped-for decolonized futures? How does our disruptive, transformative exchange reveal kinds of imaginative poverty that result from the legacy of the colonial gaze? How do I live in relationships interculturally by recognizing and lamenting limits to understanding? Whose cultural values trump in examining situations of conflicting norms? On what grounds? Who negotiates values across cultures and how? How do intercultural misunderstandings encompass and cross spheres of private and public—guarded and open—spaces, property, and sense of belonging? Misunderstanding stories also evoke questions around the pastoral function of resistance: Do I recognize experiences of violent and more subtle forms of oppression? How do power and ownership of stories enter my representations of experience? In what ways are my representations and writing colonizing? How do I participate in a postcolonial struggle to recognize oppressive structures in order to resist them in pursuit of liberation? How does the contemporary context of postcoloniality affect me? What does the contemporary context of postcoloniality afford me? Where is liminal space found for active, authentic participation within subtle neocolonial structures? Misunderstanding stories evoke questions around the pastoral function of liberation in connection to a postcolonial resistance to absolute certainty: Do I question how and what I know by attending to “the irritation of doubt” in the midst of personal and professional practices of care? How do I trace concrete consequences of how knowledge is used in practice for liberatory and/or oppressive ends? Am I being self-reflective enough in my considerations about knowledge? Who are we? Can relationship with the other endure? Can I sustain my commitment to an other human being? What kind of risk is involved? How do I participate in moral imagination to envision possibilities of expansive intercultural understanding? Is it possible to view surrender-and-catch as an orientation toward the play of empowering/being empowered and disempowering/being disempowered, resisting/recognizing complicities, and liberating/being liberated? Empowerment, resistance, and liberation are not achievable goals or ends of pastoral theology but rather processes of questioning, probing, and inviting diverse participation in mutual learning. Reframing functions as processes invites co-participating in “being on the way” toward mysteries of God and transforming (cognitive) love. 8 A model of good enough intercultural relationality adopts an in-process provisional understanding that recognizes the web of tensions in which we live. Good enough intercultural care includes asking good questions and bearing to hear and overhear responses to these questions and then to tell and retell narrative accounts of ensuing reflections and face-to-face conversations. Listening responsibly means living with provisional answers and misunderstandings without masking this as certainty. Misunderstanding stories can ground constructive theology in which good enough pastoral theologians hold disruptive experiences in tension with correlative experiences that glimpse intercultural mutuality. 9 Web of Tensions A postcolonial pastoral theology recognizes the many tensions that structure intercultural relationality. Discerning how to live well with others into tensions between risks and possibilities available in a postcolonial context becomes a central task. Any pastoral theological response to the difficult questions that arise in inevitable moments of intercultural misunderstanding must facilitate rather than squelch participation from diverse voices, both within and between cultural contexts. Previous chapters explored how networks of tension structure ways of both inviting and limiting diverse participation. Living into tensions holds open possibilities of new understanding and risks continual misunderstanding. Consider some of the pairings that hold us in tension and that I have probed in this project: We live somewhere in the liminal space of potentiality, represented above by the dashes in between. Psychoanalytic postcolonial theories stress ways in which both extremes in any of the above (particularly the colonizer—colonized) play out less dualistically and more multi-dimensionally within and among us. We need to live into these and other tensions without reifying the above descriptive categories into simple dualisms by embodying an responsible orientation toward recognition that contributes to multiple, deep, diverse, conflicting yet abundant life for all people. We must carefully navigate a sense of integrated selves within and across human beings oriented toward more mutual understandings without collapsing into colonizing, ideological, singular truth claims. In the middle of a river in Australia, salt water and fresh water meet according to the tides and seasons. The place where and time when one water flows into and receives flow from another marks a sacred site for a particular aboriginal community. 10 Religious rituals tend to appear in sites of thirdness where entities come together in ways full of both risks and possibilities. Previous chapters have explored thirdness in terms of tensions, the potential spaces between, paradox, play, liminality, touch, the dash, co-presence, co-authoring, and co-participating. How do we continue to move toward and be moved by more inclusive third ways that respect diversity and particularity? In-between spaces are opportunities for expansive horizons of understanding. 11 According to Maurice Merleau-Ponty, to think by participating in a kind of thirdness is “not to possess the objects of thought; it is to use them to mark out a realm to think about which we therefore are not yet thinking about.” 12 We can envision thirdness as the space of insight and learning facilitated both by new connections and by experiences of disruption. The moment of encounter when my hand touches an other hand or when our eyes meet in a complicit and/or resistive gaze, we are already connected in ways that require ethical response. In the words of French philosopher Jean-Luc Nancy, “It is by touching the other that the body is a body, absolutely separated and absolutely shared.” 13 Responsibility to widen horizons of understanding encourages dynamism in all kinds of interconnecting relationships. Face-to-face encounters of proximity open possibilities of intercultural empathy that recognizes inevitable risks of empathic failures. Not only does this situate any generalizable understanding, but it also creates the necessity of interpersonal responsibility: “I cannot escape my responsibility for the other, because in a face to face encounter, I am related to the other before I can make the choice not to be related. This connection makes me responsible for the other. I have to respond to the other.” 14 Can we reimagine care practices residing in the dash between ethical call of attention to suffering and responding through participating in healing? Revised Metaphor of Care in Participatory Postcolonial Pastoral Theology Pastoral theology continues to rely on insights from various schools of psychology to understand the individuated human person and surrounding group dynamics. While this has tended to direct pastoral theologians toward the project of understanding individual persons, our field affirms that individuals can only be understood in context. After all, founding parent of pastoral theology, Anton Boisen, was influenced by George Herbert Mead’s theory of the social nature of all selves. 15 Since the mid- 1990 s, the field has turned toward a guiding metaphor of the “living human web” 16 to further expand Boisen’s classical metaphor and Charles Gerkin’s adoption of this metaphor that views human persons as “living human documents” to be read, interpreted, and respected. 17 While we cannot underestimate the radical nature of considering human experience to hold the same authoritative weight as academic scholarship in projects of constructive pastoral theology, the shift from document to web suggests that human beings cannot understand one another without attending to our multiple contextual connections and disconnections in relation to families, institutions, and cultural identities. Care practices necessarily involve conceptualizing individuated human beings and social networks in creative tension. Postcolonial theories claim that relationships in many dimensions are impeded by inadequate care and an inadequate sense of relationality based in structures that heal some at the expense of harming others. The basic tenet in ethics still holds: first, do no harm. But, there is a second step: first, do no harm; then, reflect courageously on and lament unintentional harm done. While foundational pastoral practices of attentive listening and embodiment of empathy are just as important in liberationist and communal models as in traditional modalities, 18 pastoral theologians need postcolonial insights to better hear voices most affected by structural suffering and unmask complicity. We can deepen theoretical reflection on listening practices by attending more intentionally to ways in which histories record narratives of privilege over and against narratives “from below.” In other words, as we know, the suffering of many tends to afford privileges for the few. The field of pastoral theology has embraced the metaphor of “ living human web ” to account for the lively social, political, and cultural networks that hold human beings in relation to each other. 19 Considering intercultural empathy as a participatory orientation toward mutuality that is difficult to attain points to a web of tensions in which we are caught for better and for worse. Webs of complex networks support various relationships of health and well-being. At the same time, webs structure networks of oppression that trap us in relationships that contribute to suffering. 20 I recently heard a description of this metaphor in a different disciplinary context: in physics, “the more tangled the web, the harder it is to move one piece without bringing along all the rest... [because] a kind of cosmic molasses... pervades what we think of as ‘empty’ space’” between and around us. 21 In a 2008 update to the living human web metaphor, Bonnie Miller-McLemore revises the living human web metaphor to a more integrated “ living human document situated within the living human web.” 22 Moving beyond the earlier shift from self to context, this revision suggests tensions between selves and contexts. It also emphasizes that what the field typically thinks of as guiding metaphors are more than metaphorical. Guiding metaphors do just that—guide and structure pastoral responses. The shift from an individualistic to contextual to now more dynamic metaphor accounts for more complex understanding of human experience. However, in light of postcolonial challenges and recognition of greater pluralism, the guiding metaphor still needs additional revision. The metaphor of the living human document suggests the thickly textured nature of each complex human being. However, that the image of selves as documents maintains such a prominent place within pastoral theology raises postcolonial concerns about textuality that restricts participation of most people in the world. 23 Is the intent behind the metaphor of human document— the shift from reliance on written books or articles as authoritative texts to diverse lived experiences as equally, if not more, authoritative texts—really that far removed from lifting up written texts as our ideal? And if written texts are not the gold standard, then how ought we think about the standard of measuring academic excellence by production of single-authored texts? Just who is authorized to write, to read, and to interpret these texts? While I rely heavily on lived experience as an authoritative source, I also recognize that my footnotes include, for the most part, published texts. There is a reason for this: namely, I assume that pastoral theologians are responsible for recognizing, studying, and teaching some of the most important shared histories and texts in the field. Yet, studying postcolonial theories encourages me to think critically about texts, particularly texts written in English published by the best presses and written by people highly educated in Western universities. We cannot escape the troubling reality that textuality is a mandatory avenue for success in the academic life that provides access for participating in education that is more empowering, liberative, and resists dehumanization. 24 We can imagine other metaphors or descriptors that invite more diverse participation and a more complex recognition of the authoritative sources contributing to pastoral care practices as responses to suffering. Intercultural co-participation leads to a more accessible guiding metaphor or image of care. The powerful gaze that constructed socially and politically violent hierarchies in the past continues to wield power in contemporary globalized contexts. Fanon warned, “When one approaches a problem as important as that of taking inventory of the possibilities for understanding between two different peoples, one should be doubly careful.” 25 Fanon argued that we all live with fragmentation as a result of the violence of historical colonialism. Fanon’s call for de-occupation of breath still longs for response. Urgent global needs suggest the human longing for liberation and bread, freedom and breath. Participating in resistance includes lamentation and mourning through rituals of lived experience. What is at stake is somehow living together into a world of open, undetermined futures, even as pasts are unearthed, lamented, and globally contextualized. Resisting includes learning about liberation, bread, freedom, and breath by joining efforts oriented toward what one writer considers moving with “the breathing, sentient testament of the living world.” 26 Academic concepts must be grounded in meaningful intercultural experiences and reality-tested in relation to participation in perpetuating suffering and facilitating healing by and through misunderstanding stories. Participatory processes of resisting/frustrating resistance, liberating/frustrating liberation, and empowering/disempowering connect liberation, bread, freedom, and breath. The dynamic processes meet the woundedness of desires with practices of recognition as embodied awareness of suffering across cultural differences. Let us then consider the complex image of breathing embodied selves within living human webs in order to respect the tensions within and between human beings and communal contexts without restricting the metaphor as belonging to or able to be interpreted solely by the literate few. Toward Postcolonial Pastoral Theology Constructive pastoral theology comes only after a layered process of both descriptive and methodological work. This project arose out of my lived human experience as a participant in intercultural misunderstandings in a context of stark cultural differences. The readily identifiable cultural differences help identify the sheer challenge of intercultural understanding. However, international examples where we might anticipate cultural differences from the outset are merely one instance of the kinds of cultural differences around and within all of us in our contemporary world of globalism characterized by postcoloniality. The culture shock of returning to the United States from a two-year Peace Corps volunteer commitment was infinitely more difficult than the culture shock of moving overseas. Outside of the United States, we expected cultural differences would be present and would feed a font of challenges living in a country and culture rendered as other from the application process to national and international “fact sheet” representations and on into our internal worlds. Returning, being known (or having been known), and the illusion of knowing what to expect compounded the shock of what the Peace Corps calls “reentry.” I had changed and had to incorporate that change into what used to be the predictable contours of mundane life. Seemingly, everything had changed under the surface of what appeared as though nothing had changed. Overwhelming grocery stores, so many restaurants, abundantly accessible clean running water in public places all served as sites for recognizing the sheer number of misunderstandings. French philosopher and spiritual thinker Simone Weil invites us to consider just how hard it is to give one’s attention to another person around the question: “What are you going through?” 27 Misunderstanding stories often begin when we think we already know the answer and pass right on by such a paradoxically basic and profound question. Postcolonial stories of intercultural misunderstandings challenge pastoral theology from the ground up. Pastoral theology is a field that prioritizes and authorizes human experience as a legitimate and important source for theological reflection. Experiences of disjuncture translating between action and reflection, theory and experience, can challenge theological doctrine by calling into question the norms, values, and assumptions undergirding theological commitments. A postcolonial pastoral theology invites constructive theology around God’s will, “natural” faith and human development, differently distributed blessing or grace, or one-directional missions that justify neocolonial violence rooted in historical colonialism and masked by an interpretation of “postcolonialism” that the world has moved beyond colonizing hierarchies. My intercultural misunderstandings call into question the optimism and privileged access to interpreting suffering and offering healing that are implied in our guiding metaphors of text and guiding functions of liberating, empowering, and resisting in the field of pastoral theology. Practicing care in such a way that recognizes misunderstanding stories draws on psychology and theology. Good enough pastoral care practices are not reducible to psychology; 28 yet psychology continues to be an important resource for understanding human experience, for affirming a positive role for emotions and other affective experience, and for theorizing interpersonal dynamics of mutual imprinting between human beings. Practicing good enough care includes sharing in mystery, learning the cross-contextual fluency required in this interdisciplinary field, and sustaining courageous presence in the face of acknowledged disruption. In response to crisis, good enough care practices bear witness to mystery while also drawing from the deep well of theology regarding human dignity even in suffering. In pastoral theology, psychological theory helps us prioritize the role of experience and self-awareness in care, while theological reflection helps us draw on the witness of experience in order to challenge habits of forgetting and histories, languages, and representations that continue to dehumanize and prevent mutuality in recognition. Good care is embodied to the end of mutual understanding, which is a perpetual becoming and not an end to be grasped or claimed as a victory. Care can be oriented toward good or ill because of the requirement for sharing in vulnerability, so we must ever hold open conversations about good boundaries in the midst of more participatory leadership. Good enough care is liberating, empowering, and resisting to the extent that we who participate in care practices are ones who will come back. Writing, teaching, telling misunderstanding stories, hearing and overhearing misunderstanding stories serve as avenues of return and invitations for our unfolding witness of experience not of absolute truth claims, but as a process of courageous unearthing in community. I hope to contribute to a process of postcolonial constructive pastoral theology with this text. Paulo Friere once commented that we make the road through walking. 29 Misunderstanding stories pave a way for intercultural understanding by voicing the violence of systems that bind rather than facilitate creative possibilities of more mutual understanding across differences. Telling and retelling shared misunderstanding stories and hearing and overhearing misunderstanding stories of countless neighboring human beings so long rendered invisible will continue to pave dynamic roads full of possibilities. A postcolonial pastoral theology functions to empower while being aware of disempowerment, to liberate while being aware of collusion in preventing liberation, to resist injustice while being aware of how I benefit from distorted visions of justice. Therefore, a postcolonial pastoral theology moves toward a revised theological anthropology. A postcolonial pastoral theology imagines breathing embodied human beings suffering and healing through pathways and sticking points in which we are caught up in living human webs full of opportunities for participating in the constant mending required in this messy, complicated world. Therefore, a postcolonial pastoral theology will involve a revised and robust pneumatology. I look forward to participating in this scholarship that will correlate human fallibility and responsibility with the work of the spirit who breathes life into possibility. Intercultural understanding is a process that deepens pastoral theological theories of mutuality by widening our sense of possibilities regarding occasions in which we can better participate in and call for mutuality as essential to interpersonal and intercultural justice and embodiment of God’s love for all people and all of creation. A deep pastoral theological engagement with postcolonialism involves nurturing practices of living communally and interculturally in difficult questions. May we nurture practices that hold together an optimistic hope for a realized mutuality while expressing a realistic grief that reminds us of the sheer difficulty of experiencing mutual intercultural understanding. Remember, pastoral theologians know something about holding together hoping and grieving, celebration and lamentation, human fulfillment and human brokenness in a way that draws diverse participants together in a community that strives toward healing and wholeness while taking care not to minimize real challenges and differences in our midst. In MoiKonde, in local United States contexts, in academic institutions, in faith communities, the local is inextricably bound to the global. Histories are inextricably bound to strategic dehumanization in which we are complicit and whose habits of forgetting we must resist. Wary of the lure of prescriptive remedies for the world’s problems, we can recognize the ever present tensions that play out within and between us, as human beings who live together in complexly webbed connections and disconnections. When recognized as such, ordinary moments of misunderstanding paradoxically form the shared space of mutually healing intercultural understanding. Intrapersonal, interpersonal, familial, intergenerational, and certainly intercultural relationships work in and through inherent failures and frustrations. Questions around assigning value to such conflicts must be worked out through embodied experience, rather than by appealing to universal norms and rules assumed from the outset. Within experience, recognition begins in assenting to the breathing human being embodied in my neighbor, both local and global. This initial recognition can lead to movements of liberation that can proclaim, declare, legislate, and otherwise formally institute emancipation. As a world community of humanity, we need emancipation. However, we must remember the deepest recognition at stake in which humanity shares in liberation as an embodied experience of memory and openness to the learning that accompanies moving and being moved in human partnerships. A deeper recognition beholds the mystery of human dignity and assents in wonder not only to personhood but indeed to embodied humanity itself. In MoiKonde, moving through a complex process of reconciliation freed possibilities for this kind of recognition: in the narrative fragment, initial recognition sanctioned mutual understanding, but only this deeper recognition opened embodied mutual understanding where we ate together, cooked together, played together, engaged strategic community planning together, and learned together in liberative, empowering community. Open to misunderstanding, we can move into embodied experiences oriented toward mutually understanding our shared stories. 1. Browning, A Fundamental Practical Theology; Miller-McLemore, Let the Children Come, xxvii–xxxii. 2. Browning and Cooper, Religious Thought and the Modern Psychologies. 3. Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness, 7. 4. Mayeroff, On Caring. 5. Ibid., 49. 6. We see examples of this critique in sharp relief in the controversies over just what empowering international aid looks like. Interaction with the debate over the Invisible Children organization around their KONY 2012 video would be interesting in future work (see http://www.invisiblechildren.com/). 7. For example, see Pandolfo, “The Knot of the Soul.” 8. Lester, Hope in Pastoral Care and Counseling, Especially chapter 4, in which Lester references Gabriel Marcel’s journey metaphor of “being on the way” toward a more authentic expression of human existence as participation in God. 9. We read bits and pieces of the news of the recent devastation in Haiti that is almost too much to bear, and yet a reality I cannot ignore: “Convening with the dead is what allows Haitians to link themselves, directly by bloodline, to a pre-slave past,” said Ira Lowenthal, an anthropologist who has lived in Haiti for thirty-eight years. He added that with so many bodies denied rest in family burial plots, where many rituals take place, countless spiritual connections would be severed. “It is a violation of everything these people hold dear,” Mr. Lowenthal said. “On the other hand, people know they have no choice” (Cave, “As Haitians Flee, the Dead Go Uncounted”). An unthinkable natural disaster is one factor, of course. Underlying histories of colonization, poverty, and the strategic play of forgetting and remembering Haiti contributes to lack of infrastructure contextualize invitations for hosting spaces and places for repair (see Farmer, Pathologies of Power ). 10. Whiting, “Multifaith Education and the Parliament of the World’s Religions.” 11. Gerkin, The Living Human Document; Gerkin, Widening the Horizons; Scarry, The Body in Pain; Merleau-Ponty, “The Philosopher and His Shadow,” 159 – 60. 12. Merleau-Ponty, “The Philosopher and His Shadow,” 160. 13. Quoted in Rivera, The Touch of Transcendence, 135. 14. Hermans and DuPont, “Social Construction of Moral Identity,” 252. 15. Mead, Mind, Self & Society; Burkitt, Social Selves; Hunter, Dictionary of Pastoral Care and Counseling. 16. Miller-McLemore, “ The Living Human Web;” Dykstra, Images of Pastoral Care; Gill-Austern and Miller-McLemore, Feminist and Womanist Pastoral Theology; Miller-McLemore, “Revisiting the Living Human Web.” 17. Boisen, The Exploration of the Inner World; Gerkin, The Living Human Document. 18. Lartey, In Living Color, 116 – 123, 130. 19. Miller-McLemore, “The Living Human Web”; Dykstra, Images of Pastoral Care. 20. Keller, From a Broken Web. 21. Cole, “When Change is Hard, Blame Inertia.” 22. Miller-McLemore, “Revisiting the Living Human Web,” 3 – 18. 23. A potential exception would be considering selves as texts in a Talmudic sense, where the living Torah is not only written as text, but also regularly spoken, heard, and enacted. However, pastoral theology has tended to be more of a Protestant Christian movement than a tradition that recognizes connections to or the importance of maintaining lively connections with Judaism (Browning recognized this problem early in his writing; see The Moral Context of Pastoral Care ). 24. hook, Teaching to Transgress; Lorde, “The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House.” 25. Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, 84. 26. Hawken, “To Remake the World.” It is important to remember that there are plenty of opportunities for learning resistance and recognizing complicity in the United States, which is not immune to internal oppression and participation in oppression abroad, if these boundaries are even perceptible. Nor do I claim to be free from internal fragmentation. 27. Weil, “Reflections on the Right Use of School Studies with a View to the Love of God.” 28. Gay, “Mapping Religion Psychologically.” 29. Bell et al., We Make the Road by Walking.