Acknowledgments Something else—something else entirely holds me in thrall... That you have a life—courteous, intelligent— that I wonder about more than I wonder about my own. That you have a soul—your own, no one else’s— that I wonder about more than I wonder about my own. So that I find my soul clapping its hands for yours more than my own. 1 Foondoo signifies an embodied experience of wonder, astonishment, amazement, particularly in relation to other people. Fanowdu signifies the shared obligation to respond to need, to restore harmony across our various modes of being. 2 Misunderstanding stories invite the response of wonder into the immediate need of disruption. Words in Sranan Tongo, the lingua franca of the Republic of Suriname and linguistically similar to the Saakiki we spoke in MoiKonde, 3 foondoo and fanowdu point to my goals in this book as well as the process of acknowledging my deep gratitude around this book. Misunderstanding stories that disrupt us can evoke wonder. In a crowded and rushed schedule, in between tasks, in an unexpected phone call on a New Year’s morning, we experience disruption. Disruptive moments provoke us to contemplate the loss of a person, a state of being, a way of life, a particular vision of the future. In moments of crisis, experiencing a disruption on the level of human existence leads to places of deep vulnerability. 4 Sustaining presence in such moments is made possible by communal support. My experiences in Peace Corps service in the Republic of Suriname allowed me to focus on understanding postcolonial dynamics of the present day from shared experiences and relationships. I am especially grateful for SUR 8, and the entire village of MoiKonde with whom I lived in community—especially for the village children, leaders, and partners, named with pseudonyms in this book. Village elders bestowed blessings upon me, granting me permission to draw on my experience in MoiKonde in this project within the oral-culture tradition. For this, I am deeply grateful. I continue to embrace the name given to me, AbbaMai, and hope to live up to its multiple meanings. I thank all who have provided intellectual, financial, and emotional support for this project. Volney Gay, the director of my dissertation, Bonnie Miller-McLemore, Mark Bliton, John Thatamanil, and Tracy Sharpley-Whiting for their advice, care, challenge, and support. I will always be thankful for each of these teachers who met me when I was finally ready to embrace academic writing as vocation. I can trace the intellectual development of this project through years of personally meaningful and intellectually rigorous academic relationships with Heather Warren, Cassandra Fraser, Peter Ochs, Kristen Leslie, Margaret Farley, and Letty Russell. This project has benefitted from financial support from Phillips Theological Seminary, the Vanderbilt Graduate Department of Religion, the Vanderbilt Center for Ethics, and a 2009 – 2010 American Fellowship from the American Association of University Women. Vanderbilt University and Phillips Theological Seminary provided intellectual space for this project to flourish. I am grateful for the opportunity to present pieces of this project in public venues. These included the Society of Pastoral Theology, the Women’s Writing Circle, the International Conference on Clinical Ethics Consultation, the American Academy of Religion, Phillips Theological Seminary, the Vanderbilt Global Feminisms Collaborative, the Vanderbilt Center for Biomedical Ethics and Society, Belmont United Methodist Church, and Boston Avenue United Methodist Church. I am grateful for the mentoring and provocative conversations with both Emmanuel Lartey and the group of women pastoral theologians with whom I was graciously invited to work on the Women Out of Order multi-authored book project ( 2010 ). Additional creative space was forged in the classroom with engaged and thoughtful students. The Wabash Center for Teaching and Learning and the Association of Theological Schools provided space and support for pedagogical reflection around this project that has sparked informal networks of communal support. Among the most meaningful conversations opening space for creative and critical thinking was in making multiple returns to the misunderstanding stories in this text. MoiKonde hosted me and bestowed blessing on this project and on our continued relationship years after I had moved back to the United States. Mr. Salomon Emanuels graciously traveled to the United States to support this project in earlier stages. Mr. Emanuels reminds me of the importance of sustainability in relationships that endure over a lifetime, and not only for a brief two-year service commitment. Dr. Gloria Wekker graciously partnered with me in the Netherlands to introduce me to some of the postcolonial dynamics that Afro-Surinamese face in relation to the former colonizing country. Dr. Wekker also read and critically engaged an earlier version of the manuscript. For her mentorship and critical attention, I am most grateful. I thank K. C. Hanson, Jeremy Funk, and Wipf and Stock Publishers for editorial support. Behind the scenes, my deepest gratitude to Kalbryn McLean for participating in a dynamic, creative partnership that grew from the seemingly straightforward task of editorial support. Mary Ann Morris and Rhonda Chester-Quiroz devoted countless hours to research support. I am thankful for my family, writing partners, colleagues, Peace Corps family, and especially for Dean Pittman, M. Y. Perkins, Elizabeth Munz, Lisa Davison, the A-Team, Amanda Peltz, Kairos, Cornerstone, Missy Boyette, Heather Daley, Cindy Arnn, the Meieres, Elizabeth Baggett, Liz Zagatta-Allison, Kate Lassiter, Leanna Fuller, Karla Van Zee, Nichole R. Phillips, Eileen Campbell-Reed, Virginia Bartlett, Kyle Galbraith, David Lott, Carolyn Mareburger, my sister Elizabeth, my parents Nancy and Jim, and all the rest of the McGarrahs and Sharps. For supporting writing as an embodied process, I am grateful to Dr. Evon Flesberg’s hospitality and writing space at Querencia, Julie Clemons, Miss Shelley and the tap ladies, and my Wabash colleagues. Tommy McGarrah Sharp, AbaaPai, continues to be my best friend and most enthusiastic supporter. While completing this project, we birthed into the world two amazing children who continue to inspire wonder with their wisdom and energy. This book is dedicated to them as part of a commitment to name injustice, to remember to play and create, and to work toward healing as familiar practices in our family life in relation to the mending of the world. Finally, my deepest gratitude to the poets, musicians, artists, mystics and visionaries who continue to support me by helping me glimpse a greater depth of possibility where “I find my soul clapping” with you. 1. Oliver, “What Is the Greatest Gift?,” 76. 2. Personal conversation with Gloria Wekker, April 12, 2012. 3. MoiKonde (translated as “beautiful place”) is a pseudonym for an Afro-Surinamese village where I lived for two years as a Peace Corps volunteer. 4. Lester, Hope in Pastoral Care and Counseling, 44, 51.