3 Narrating Identities in Crisis W ho am I? is a basic question that confronts human beings in the midst of life experiences. Who are we? also confronts us at expected and unexpected times and places, particularly in response to communal and process-oriented movements within traditionally individualistic ways of understanding human beings and networks of relationships. In our postcolonial and intercultural contexts, occasions for misunderstanding stories are increasing, which opens up more possibilities for identity and relationship crisis. Experiences of crisis in relationships almost always open space for raising questions of identity. That is not to say that identity questions are always voiced into open spaces or that invitations to ask questions about identities are always welcome. A desire to preserve the illusion of a once and for all set identity from which I can imagine future trajectories and reconcile past experiences can be gripping. However, as soon as one considers time as a dimensional phenomenon in which both past and future always bear on the present, we can remember again how absurd is the idea of a once and for all static identity that never moves and never shifts. Appealing to experience, we can recognize that all of us without exception are constantly shaped by and shape our individualized and communal identities in a constant state of becoming. Paradoxically, change is constant, uncertainty a certainty. Life experiences always affect identities. Stories stay with us, literally becoming incorporated into our self-structure, 1 the scaffolding that gives shape and support to the stories we tell about who we are—our identity narratives. Opportunities for growth and change in identity can be chosen through education or other investments in learning or can happen involuntarily through experiences of loss or life transition. Pastoral theologians appeal to developmental theories because of the way in which these theories structure metanarratives of identity that account for who we are, how we’ve lived, and how we’ve endured. Developmental theories also structure predictions of who we are becoming, how life will continue to unfold, and what kind of endurance we will individually and collectively need for the journey ahead. Remember that pastoral theology and good enough pastoral care start with the human experience of attending suffering in community. Most seminarians will study theories of human development at some point in theological education as a way of helping to discern and predict the care needs, the challenges that contribute to or exacerbate suffering, and the practices of healing relevant to persons of different ages and stages of life. But there is a problem. Consider the following illustration. “Two Languages, Many Voices” refers to a segment of interviews that ran on National Public Radio in the fall of 2011. While the special news series focuses on the experiences of Latinos in the United States in particular, many Latino Americans interviewed raise important questions around the intersections of identities and intercultural realities of a twenty-first-century world that everyone needs to hear and engage. In one interview, Cuban American and Columbia University professor Gustavo Perez Firmat describes how he turns to genres of writing like poetry and memoir to help make sense of his experience that “words fail him” in both Spanish and English. He evokes the Czech proverb, “learn a new language, get a new soul,” and asks: is it such a good idea to have more than one soul? 2 He does not ask about developing from a more “primitive” soul to a more “developed” soul; no, he is raising a question of recognizing multiple valid threads in a complexly woven identity. The breaches described in the last chapter that initiated misunderstanding stories for me within intercultural relationships in MoiKonde raise questions of identity in the midst of my participation in an intentional learning process around cross-contextual fluency. Learning a new language indeed affects identity. As a partner in intercultural relationships, I experienced questions and crisis in relation to my identity, the identities of my friends and partners in MoiKonde, and how to identify the character of our life together. For example, when Mia and Ella asked me if they would be free in America, I was at once Peace Corps volunteer in the midst of intercultural friendship, disrupting the isolationist privilege that can prevent intercultural relationships of mutuality, and privileged citizen of a country with a complex history of enslaving and colonizing people just like Mia and Ella. Even if Mia and Ella recognized me as an exception to what I have historically represented, and even if I recognized Mia and Ella as exceptions to how “people like them” have been historically represented, I still must wrestle with embodying the perceived norm of US imperialism through my identity as a US citizen. Being an American means radically different things in different circumstances. Recognizing the complexity of representation raises questions of multiple identities. Is it such a good idea to recognize more than one soul? Above, Firmat is speaking out of his intercultural experience as an exile in America, a common category claimed by immigrants to the United States. I write as a former partner in the work of sustainable community development with neighbors in MoiKonde, a small Saakiki village in the Republic of Suriname, South America. I agree with Firmat, who argues that multi- and intercultural stories must be written and voiced into liminal spaces, what Turner calls betwixt and between. 3 Theological and sociological concepts and practices of home, belonging, community, and language become more nuanced in conversation with the intercultural nature of contemporary identities. Further, identity crises that accompany misunderstanding stories in intercultural relationships provoke wonder around the phenomenon of sharing in the human condition across cultural differences. At the same time that I recognize intercultural relationships as part of my mundane reality, I am also astonished: How is it possible to share in human experience across such wide expanses of cultural difference? How is it possible to recognize multiplicities even within my own soul? Questions of identity often bubble up in the midst of life as persons and communities move and grow. However, scholars of postcolonial psychology caution that the stories of development, growth, and change offered by developmental theory can easily collude with strategies of dehumanization. In other words, the study of developmental theory can represent the privileged development of some human beings afforded through strategies of oppression of other human beings contained in and masked by developmental theory as ideology. This chapter explores questions of identity and identity crisis through analysis of developmental and postcolonial theories. Stories of disruptive moments within intercultural relationships can be described in terms of breaches in intercultural understanding. As chapter 2 discussed, such breaches invite a flow of questions into experiences of disruption. I continue to adapt Turner’s trajectory to structure story-telling as a process that moves from breach in understanding toward a renewed relationship of reconciliation that incorporates the breach experience and includes experiences of and reflection on identity crisis. The following section retells another piece of one of the misunderstanding stories introduced in previous chapters to illustrate identity crises that flow forth from an experience of breach in intercultural understanding. A Narrative Fragment of Identity Crisis in Misunderstanding Stories Like our neighbors in MoiKonde, we lived outside in the shade of trees or in open-air thatched-roof porches or cooking structures almost all the time, as the zinc metal-roofed houses only cool in the evenings. Even when we were inside, we regularly conversed through open windows with our friends in the neighboring houses as if we were sitting across the room from one another. Conversations across houses and in shared outside spaces filled each and every day: “Fa waka anga yu tide mamatain?” (How are you this morning?) “San yu boli gi mi tide ba?” (What are you cooking today for us to share?) “San pasa anga a pikin?” (What happened that is making a child cry?) “Yu opo Abaamai?” (Are you awake yet, Abaamai? Or, in the evening, Are you still awake, Abaamai?) In MoiKonde, we learned to live communally as an everyday practice. In MoiKonde, we learned to live communally as a way of understanding and therefore seeing reality. Who am I? I am astonished at the invitation to learn to live in community. Who are we? We are different yet live together as neighbors. Can we sustain this intercultural relationship of life together in community? Learning to live communally is in constant tension with recognition of difference. This is found in our names. Naming ceremonies in MoiKonde provide an important framework for intracultural and intercultural hospitality. Bestowed to us in a formal community meeting within days of our arrival, we were given new names: Abaamai and Abaapai. Literally translated as “from across,” our new names made it impossible to forget the differences we were navigating on a daily basis. With these names, we were welcomed into a communal way of life with constant opportunities to learn to live well in this context. With these names, we literally embodied the translation work of intercultural partnership required to do so. Who am I? Who are we? We cross and live across from each other, and yet we are learning to be neighbors. The highly communal way of life was facilitated by our willingness to learn through making linguistic mistakes in word choice, pronunciation, and use of metaphor; through mistakes about cultural practices of where to walk; through mistakes about appropriate dress for corresponding cultural ritual; through mistakes traversing spaces with respect and safety, especially when navigating the rainforest with our neighbors. These mundane and even humorous disruptions characterized the atmosphere of learning that made communal living possible. The highly communal way of life that we were continually learning and that we had come to appreciate was severely disrupted when we returned to the village after several weeks away in the United States. Each morning, the routine greeting (one must formally greet each and every person one passes in the morning, midday, and evening, even if simply walking through the woods to a bathing area to brush one’s teeth) now occurred in awkwardly navigated shared spaces. Great distances cut through our small neighborhood. We could feel these fresh rifts but could not understand. I don’t understand how to be Abaamai, and yet I am Abaamai. Who am I? Who are we? Can we sustain this intercultural relationship of life together in community? Unexpectedly, we constantly crossed the line. Any effort to reconcile seemed to offer yet another invisible treason. How do we identify and navigate the unstable status of previously shared spaces? While we were away, we learned that the daughters of our neighbors, the very children and families with whom we lived in community, had broken into our home in our absence. We were able to recognize differing norms of insider/outsider information sharing when we learned that we were not supposed to have received the news of the breach. The insider community had apparently experienced a second breach and crisis when the message was communicated to us by our friend, who also finds himself as somewhat of an outsider who has married into a prominent family in the village. Who are we? The breach created by the violation of private property (also a contested concept in such a communal way of living) was not the difficult breach to navigate, however. The difficult breach to navigate was a breach in understanding how to recover from the violation of trust within the intercultural relationship. We experienced the crisis of failed attempts to communicate with the girls, their mothers, their siblings, the larger community, schoolteachers, the school headmaster, and elders of the village. Our efforts to communicate intensified the crisis, as they did not match with the norms of communication for the village. We could almost see and certainly could feel the mismatch. We could not yet imagine how best to proceed given this painful recognition. Could we sustain intercultural relationship of life together in community? Who are we to play a part in so doing? Understanding Identity Crises through Developmental Stage Theory A breach in understanding leads to crises of identity. Framing questions of identity with language—who am I? and who are we?—in and of itself can intensify experiences of identity crisis. Psychoanalyst Erik Erikson’s influential developmental psychology considers identity crisis as the pivotal phenomenon that encourages growth throughout the lifespan. While the particular aspect of one’s identity in question changes throughout life, Erikson maps periodic serious questions around identity as developmental tasks necessary for maturity. Erikson is only one example of a developmental theorist who affirms that identities change over time with life experience and age. Developmental psychologies will always be popular because of their predictive assumptions that map the kinds of challenges one will likely face over the course of life. The same perception of predictability that makes development theories so appealing is also their limit in the assumption that life unfolds over a more or less linear trajectory of predictable peak and valley experiences from the more identifiably immature to the more identifiably mature. Before critical engagement with this dilemma, let us briefly review Erikson’s developmental psychology. Erikson proposes a stage-by-stage model of chronological and psychological development that insists on the influence of real changes prompted by encounters between human beings. Erikson seriously considers complex yearnings for growth, learning, and movement from one phase to another within relationships across cultural groups. He values growth potential even while he is mindful of the identity struggle that facilitates change. Influenced by biology and psychoanalytic constructions of identity, Erikson asserts a continuum of human development in a process that unfolds in nine discernible stages from birth to old age in specific patterns and accompanied by significant transitions between each stage. Experiences of conflict, or experiences of a “core crisis,” 4 characterize the transition to each new stage of development. For psychological development to occur, each stage-specific core crisis requires resolution. Subsequently, each resolution involves a human being making choices directly related to the question, who am I?, which then moves human beings from stage to stage. In this theory, each time a human being successfully navigates the identity crisis of a major life transition, a new virtue is generated. 5 Not just any virtue, but a lifetime of negotiating developmental transitions generates a specific progression of predictable virtues, each virtue necessary for the next developmental transition: hope, then will, then purpose, then competence, then fidelity, then love, then care, then, finally, wisdom. 6 Successful negotiation of identity crises over the lifespan leads to human survival and to emergence and endurance of character as ingredient to identity formation. Over time, a strong sense of self comes to be embedded in and supported by a particular contextual network. Navigating identity crises through developmental stages involves a sense of participating in the human condition and belonging to communal groups. Basic human needs of encounter and belonging have a dynamic relationship. The phenomenon of encounter moves human beings toward inclusivity by foregrounding the relational nature of persons that allows for growth and change through their interactions. The phenomenon of belonging moves human beings toward exclusivity by emphasizing commonalities that contribute to the creation and maintenance of groups. As in the anthropological theories employed by pastoral theologian Emmanuel Lartey reviewed in chapter 1, Erikson recognizes the tensions between navigating one’s identity always in relation to all human beings, some human beings, and no other human being. In terms of symbolic interaction represented in play therapy with children, Erikson distinguished between common meanings available to all, special meanings available to discrete groups, and unique meanings of life experiences, language, and material reality available to me. 7 Human beings need the mediating language required by both moments of encountering often prone to misunderstanding and possibilities of mutual understanding found in belonging to groups. Theorizing that encounter and belonging are fundamental to what it means to be human leads to moral obligations to attend to these categories of experience in discerning and practicing pastoral care and constructing pastoral theologies. Each new interpersonal encounter begins not with practicing care or recognizing inherent goodness or human dignity, but rather with a mutual sizing up. 8 In the narrative fragment above, I noted that new names were bestowed on us soon after our arrival, but not immediately. This gave time for the kind of mutual sizing up that precedes understanding. Human beings require some time to get to know one another; in the best of cases, social structures provide the space and time for the practices of acquaintance that accompany relationships of mutual care. Spatially, in the middle of Erikson’s stage theory is not midlife but rather adolescence as the height of identity crisis. Adolescence follows successful navigation of the preceding four stages of infancy, early childhood, play age, and school age. The challenges of adolescence are a necessary hurdle to experiencing the four subsequent stages of young adulthood, adulthood, old age, and the ninth stage characterized by transcendence. 9 While each stage turns on an experience of crisis, Erikson designates identity crisis as the core crisis of adolescence in which human beings realize the need for recognition by their community. Recognition as a process that involves a human being and her or his community(ies) of belonging is key both to provoking and to resolving experiences of identity crisis. Adolescence as a stage of peak identity crises is full of mutual sizing up. A human being needs to be recognized for who she or he is and has chosen to be. At the same time, the identified community(ies) of belonging needs to be perceived as recognizing this human being for who she or he is and has chosen to be. In the best circumstances, negotiating identity crisis in a way that recognizes a developing sense of identity, communicates a developing sense of identity, and receives communal responses of affirmation or rejection around a developing sense of identity is challenging for adolescents. The best circumstances occur when communities of belonging allow for a broad range of identity expression. The most difficult circumstances to negotiate happen when socially sanctioned roles are so narrow as to constrict possibilities of being recognized at all. Postcolonial theorists name experiences of this pervasive dynamic non-recognition. One legacy of colonialism is strategic forgetting in relation to the goodness of human beings, who necessarily display a broad range of identity. In general, this developmental psychology theorizes that human growth is a process by which society supports human beings’ efforts to integrate internal conflicts with external contexts. 10 However, writing in 1950, Erikson recognized the unequal access available to children to participate in US American identity because of our being schooled into prejudices through social structures, media representation, parenting, and formal education. 11 Systemic injustice regulates social roles, responsibilities, and opportunities differently for different human beings by reinforcing misunderstanding through repeated narratives that may sound, but need not be, true. 12 The mutual sizing up within human encounters is an attempt to probe integrity of another person, to question whether he or she is experimenting with playing a role or whether he or she is moving into a socially acceptable identity. 13 Relationships of mutual care develop when attentive, expectant presence can be maintained over and against the social suspicion often instituted through historical schooling. 14 We are all susceptible to getting so caught up in the mutual sizing up that we risk real harm when any of us misunderstands our own and others’ identity narratives. 15 Narrating Identity Crisis to What End? Developmental psychology as modeled by Erikson must be recognized for both its contributions and its limitations. Erikson exhibits a deep regard for intricacies of human beings who continually move, change, and grow throughout the lifespan. Developmental psychology reminds us that children require caretaking by persons more developmentally mature, persons who have wrestled with conflicts and found in them the virtues and strengths of hope, will, purpose, competence, fidelity, love, care, and wisdom. While helpful in thinking about the transitions from childhood to adulthood, Erikson’s stage theory fails to consider the role of adversity on development, or the ways in which these ordered virtues bolster the courage required throughout the lifespan when social structures fail to support experiences of identity crisis. 16 Developmental psychology categorizes human beings in archetypal stages of “normal” development. While Erikson’s theory is based in clinical observation and is populated by stories of clinical encounters, he decides to “attempt to do without narrative” 17 to develop an overarching system of normative development that either stalls out or progresses to each subsequent stage without exception. 18 However, he does allow for two qualifications. First, as an example of the potentiality in each of us and the good ends to which so-called advanced development can be directed, Erikson allows for great adult persons in history, such as Gandhi, Martin Luther, and Martin Luther King Jr. to skip intermediate stages, contributing wisdom before their chronological old-age stage. Second, Erikson and his wife, artist Joan Erikson, developed a ninth stage, roughly defined as dealing-with-old-age, as they literally outgrew their previously theorized eighth stage of old age, adding additional nuance to adult experience as varied over time as well. 19 Erikson allows his own experience to expand the number of stages of generalized stage-based development. However, he fails to extend similar flexibility to human beings in general, asserting the reality of bounded, step-by-step human development with the exception of a few great adult persons. At best, it is unclear how Erikson accounts for the many who, for whatever reason, lead less linearly organized lives. Attentive to injustices in his post-World War II social context around race, ethnicity, gender, nationality, and religious identity, Erikson theorized the importance of culture for psychological development in ways radical for his time. 20 However, his developmental schema still makes individualistic, privileged experience normative for successful development. Oppression is often characterized as a deliberate denial of an individuated person’s or discrete cultural group’s sense of identity by the imposition of a rigid order onto lived experience. Wisdom, the virtue Erikson assigns to old age, often appears in human beings and discrete groups experiencing oppression, even in children, whom Erikson places at the other end of the developmental spectrum, well before the structural possibility of wisdom as a virtue. In 2004 the Dutch Parliament named Anne Frank the “greatest Dutch person in history.” 21 Her identity as a Jewish child was systematically denied within an oppressive and ordered privileged identity. 22 And yet many consider Anne Frank a child “wise beyond her years” in her ability to record and reflect upon her experience of oppression during the Holocaust. Resistance to oppression often includes the kind of wisdom that helps maintain “some order and meaning in the dis-integration of body and mind.” 23 Systematic theologian Beverly Mitchell recognizes the wisdom required to maintain a sense of human dignity in the midst of the violence of identity-based oppression. 24 Erikson seems to consider counter-narratives that challenge his linear, age-based theory of development, such as children who need or have wisdom or generativity in the face of social oppression, as outliers. 25 Many crisis experiences, both internally and externally provoked, do not occur at “age-appropriate” times and so do not bear their fruits according to a chronological schema. Norms meant to guide human development for all may in reality be experienced by a privileged few. At a theoretical level, Erikson respects the cultural location and relational nature of human beings; but in describing how his theories unfold in lived experience, he defines a norm that excludes those socially unrecognized as having power to assert their place on his continuum or to contest the normative narrative implied by the continuum. Erikson sacrifices personal stories to create a complete system of development. But his “attempt to do without narrative” instead leaves his system radically incomplete because the theory fails to account for how power works in systematic oppression, where the least powerful and sickest among us have few structural opportunities to belong; but it also labels anyone who is not developing “normally” as deviant and unsuccessful. What is the best use of developmental theories as a basis for age-appropriate predictions of identity and crises in identities? Analysis of Erikson’s developmental theory suggests that attention to relational human beings who encounter and belong at the expense of narrative fails to account for the suffering due to the complex ways in which structural oppression affects opportunities in lived experience. Developmental theories should instead supplement narratives of human beings embedded in intercultural contexts. Intercultural understanding is best tested on the edge of experiences where narrative becomes a vehicle for recognizing misunderstanding and for realizing possibilities of mutual understanding. This is especially the case with misunderstanding stories in which human nature, uncertainty, and possibility intersect. To what end do we tell and retell narratives of identity crisis? Appealing to Erikson as an influential model of developmental psychology, we tell and retell stories of identity crisis as a way of narrating a successful journey through major life transitions. However, postcolonial theories have exposed that developmental psychology has been used to create and cement identity crisis in such a way that successful resolution is only available to those with structural power and is therefore afforded to some human beings by way of instituting identity crisis as a strategy of dehumanizing other human beings. Understanding this dilemma within a compelling model of human development that has structured best practices of pastoral care in the past can help reorient the telling and retelling of narratives of identity crisis toward more liberative and empowering ends that resist strategies of dehumanization. Pastoral theologians have always considered the ethics of care, albeit in more or less explicit ways. It is important for us to keep reflecting on the goals of story-telling, story-listening, story interpreting. In this book, I tell and retell misunderstanding stories for the purposes of more liberative and empowering partnerships across cultural differences that resist the dehumanizing strategies that structure our postcolonial world. However, it is significant that my role as a partner in development work, even development work oriented toward sustainability and modeled on friendship, is also problematic. Consider the misunderstanding story introduced in earlier chapters in which I intervened in child discipline with my friend. In terms of identity crisis, new questions emerge. First, what and who was I witnessing? I was seeing the particular child-rearing/disciplinary practices of one mother. At the same time, I was seeing a culturally sanctioned and common form of child discipline. At the same time, I was seeing the legacy of colonial violence. At the same time, I was seeing my friend and I was seeing a cultural other. At the same time, I was resisting unquestioned moral categories and I was complicit in colonizing strategies. The cross-contextual complexity of this situation challenged my cross-contextual fluency. What does a liberative and empowering practice of translation founded on a model oriented toward mutual understanding look like when disrupted in all of these ways? This set of questions raises another set of questions around how we witness in moments of disruption. Who was I when I was witnessing this disruptive breach in understanding? The breach was disruptive, in part, because it activated an identity crisis within me as I was learning to recognize my own multiplicity in the process of cross-contextual fluency. 26 In this experience, I was seeing myself as a neighbor and friend. At the same time, I was seeing myself as a participant in a highly communal way of life that challenged my US-American notion of privacy. At the same time, I was seeing myself as the person in charge of my private domestic space. And I was seeing an opportunity to exercise my moral convictions about justice and human rights. At the same time, I was infringing on the process of partnership by taking on my role as an official representative from a country whose narrative includes “our” more evolved sense of morality in relation to child-rearing practices. In spite of my best intentions, I felt a colonizing impulse to “civilize” “this woman” in this moment of crisis. At the same time, I was appalled by and resisted this impulse. Conditions were ripe for experiences of identity crisis. Misunderstanding stories raise challenging questions about identity. To frame identity crisis with language activates even more identity crisis. Who am I? Who are we? Telling and retelling misunderstanding stories raises postcolonial dilemmas shaped in part by developmental theories. In the following section, I appeal to a postcolonial perspective on developmental psychology to probe ways in which the idea of “normal” human development has worked as a dehumanizing strategy that has supported historical colonialism and that lives on in its legacy. Misunderstanding Stories of (Human) Development Work Legacies of colonization have lingering psychological consequences within the human family. Writing in response to legacies of British colonialism in India, postcolonial theorist and psychoanalytically trained Ashis Nandy debunks the prevalent colonial idea that cultural development moves from child to adult and from the feminine to the masculine. These colonizing myths trap some human beings in representations of dark-skinned, weak, female-bodied (although typically hypersexualized) children “in need” of being governed by the white masculine adults, who represent ideals of identity-formation. As Fanon suggests, the colonial gaze is raced. Nandy adds that the colonial gaze is gendered and aged. Colonial gazing facilitates seeing not human beings but instead representations of dehumanized raced, gendered, aged bodies. Colonialism works by training whole communities to see and appreciate one vision of healthy development in terms of whiteness, maleness, and developmental maturity while masking the violence done via inscribing visible identity markers with varying developmental capacities. 27 The Intimate Enemy: Loss And Recovery of Self under Colonialism ( 1983 ) by Nandy shows how developmental theory supports strategies of dehumanization embodied in these practices of gazing. Nandy introduces gender and age as colonizing categories of inner life and interpersonal relationships, surveys literary responses to colonial heritage, and draws on Gandhi to problematize linear notions of gender, time, and history. 28 For example, aggression, achievement, control, competition, and power are not only stereotypical representations of colonizing forces but also represent mature adults in Western developmental psychology as well as in the historical accounts that funded the colonial imagination. In contrast, “the notion of the African as a minor, endorsed at times even by a Livingstone, took very strong hold. Spaniards and Boers had questioned whether natives had souls: modern Europeans cared less about that but doubted whether they had minds, or minds capable of adult growth. A theory came to be fashionable that mental growth in the African ceased early, that childhood was never left behind.” 29 Nandy demonstrates how colonized human beings came to be represented as children. We saw in Erikson that children and even adolescents require caretaking by persons recognized as more mature, in persons who have found virtues in successful resolution of identity struggles. In schema like Erikson’s, Nandy shows how colonized human beings were represented as adolescents. On one hand, colonial projects sought to reform human beings who were recast as child like: the “innocent, ignorant but willing to learn, masculine, loyal and thus ‘corrigible.’” On the other hand, colonial projects sought to repress human beings recast as child ish: the “ignorant but unwilling to learn, ungrateful, sinful, savage, unpredictably violent, disloyal, and thus ‘incorrigible.’” 30 Opportunities for recognition normally available in identity crises were denied to colonized persons as they were actively excluded from communities of belonging and restricted to narrow subservient social roles. Nandy exposes not only the juvenalization of colonized human beings but also the fundamental devaluing of their personhood in such a way that distorts what any developmental stage theory would suggest as part of the normal growing up. Dehumanizing representations impede recognition in two ways. First, such representations perpetuate habits of gazing at other human beings in a way that prevents recognizing their personhood. Second, they mask complicity in the violence of colonialism by disguising violence as a good in the form of cultural caretaking: “good for them,” “good for us,” “good for all.” 31 In the West, colonizing violence has been justified by historically lauding the colonizer as a responsible salvific adult who imposes superior ethical codes upon inferior “blank slate” children in desperate need of education for their own good lest they remain undeveloped and devalued. 32 Nandy points out that colonialism also devalues elders, traditionally esteemed for embodying the pinnacle of progress but who atrophy through colonizing forces that dehumanize elders with strategies that suggest “these people” also desperately need salvation from younger, stronger, more stable adults. 33 Myths of progress—fueled by racism, ageism, and sexism—work by suggesting false avenues of development for colonized human beings, dehumanized through integration into colonial metanarratives as permanently immature. Colonialism as moral, psychological, spiritual, and physical development work, particularly in the form of global mission, depends on strategies of dehumanization directed at human beings who come to be seen as objects and not as neighbors. In other words, it uses Western notions of development to refuse recognition to the other and by that very refusal seeks to forestall the development it pretends is already impossible. The circular logic here intentionally disguises a grand misunderstanding story as truth, thus institutionalizing a paternalistic form of misunderstanding. Strategies of dehumanization can force colonized human beings to entertain the impossible choice between two violent and therefore fundamentally disempowering options: denying their identity to assimilate or recognizing their identity with the knowledge that this will incite violence. We can understand lingering consequences of these colonizing “choices” in practices of exclusion that range from legislated marginalization to calls for assimilation to ignoring the personhood of others who represent the formerly colonized by simply refusing to see them as sharing in humanity. 34 The second part of Nandy’s argument in The Intimate Enemy is a study of human resilience in relation to the psychology of colonialism. Through competing narratives of how human beings navigate colonial representations, he argues that oppressors necessarily and consistently discount the oppressed as nonhuman and thus automatically less able to participate in conversation, move into an open future, or become incorporated into any other practice of so-called “civilized” society. 35 Psychological splitting facilitates colonialism through the illusion that the world is neatly and necessarily divided between “like me and therefore recognizably human” and “not human like me and therefore legitimately dehumanized.” However, he explains, while the oppressors must dehumanize those whom they subjugate, the mindset of oppressed human beings is that they survive and live in the presence of a human oppressor. Nandy insists on a preferential option for the oppressed, but not out of the kind of biblical grounding of liberation theologies. The essential reasoning is simple. Between the modern master and the non-modern slave, one must choose the slave not because one should choose voluntary poverty or admit the superiority of suffering, not only because the slave is oppressed, not even because [the slave] works (which, Marx said, made [him or her] less alienated than the master). One must choose the slave also because [the slave] represents a higher-order cognition which perforce includes the master as a human, whereas the master’s cognition has to exclude the slave except as a “thing.” 36 Oppressed human beings often recognize oppressing human beings as fully human as a survival strategy by perfecting strategies of cross-contextual fluency and negotiating dehumanizing rules through careful practices of resistance, such as maintaining a cohesive sense of self in the face of colonizing violence. Indeed, the choice to recognize the oppressor as human is all the more developmentally advanced, as it were, if it is, in fact, easy to dehumanize the oppressor who so consistently masks violence as a good. In Erikson, recognition given and received in adolescence is precisely what allows us the capacity to recognize others. Yet some unrecognized members of the colonized group develop the capacity anyway—that is, without first receiving recognition from their oppressors. Nandy radically inverts modern hierarchies by envisioning dehumanized human beings as the ones living in reality while the so-called master has become trapped in inner self-conflict fighting a projected, split enemy-self in the form of the other, whose suffering he justifies as a necessary good. Even with this reversal the psychological consequences of colonialism perpetuate practices of non-recognition throughout the human family. 37 Nandy examines psychological colonialism and gives preference to the subjectivity of dehumanized human beings. But he resists the academic impulse and pressure to deliver a neatly packaged theory that presents final answers. 38 Instead, he not only deliberately leaves loose ends and untidy places in this text, but he also immediately problematizes each concluding section with critical and challenging questions. 39 Nandy includes an explicit warning to those of us who, even in the name of postcolonialism, work in hegemonic text-based academic circles: “A living culture has to live and it has an obligation to itself, not to its analysts. Even less does it have any obligation to conform to a model, its own or someone else’s.” 40 We share in the responsibility to engage the role of representations in perpetuating suffering. Nandy’s psychology of colonialism resonates with the field of pastoral theology, which attends suffering and reflects on healing with similar methodological commitments such as valuing lived human experience, critically evaluating the relationship between practices (including religious practices) and psychological health, participating in interdisciplinary conversations as a learning process, and recognizing the value of identity crisis within academic study. 41 Developmental Ideology and Misunderstanding in the (Human) Family Developmental psychology has served as a paradigm for healthy growth within relational human beings across the lifespan; yet, it is based on inherent biological and social struggles of “normal” growing up. Postmodernity exposes just these kinds of normative claims embedded in and assumed by modern theories of personhood. Erikson envisions healthy development in terms of human beings who move predictably from living with a given identity at birth, to making a series of choices to resolve identity crises at each developmental transition, to finally in old age giving back to others. In fact, Erikson claims that when all goes well in this trajectory, “Death... can be made [a human being’s] final gift” of generativity and generosity to the world. 42 While it may be inspiring, even therapeutically helpful, to maintain an ideal healthy life cycle, developmental norms patterned on trajectories of privilege limit opportunities for recognition. 43 When recognition is available to some human beings at the expense of non-recognition of other human beings, the structural death of personal and social opportunities over a lifetime is not a gift. In this sense, developmental psychology can be used to frustrate rather than facilitate mutual understanding. Stated another way, developmental psychology can contribute to misunderstanding stories, especially when we recognize how powerfully developmental narratives structure many international and intercultural relationships in dehumanizing ways. Pastoral theologians have critically engaged problems of non-recognition in relation to women and children within family life. 44 However, problems of non-recognition extend more broadly in the human family. By analogy, development work suggests that healthy development within the human family moves from so-called “primitive” cultures through a series of identity crises to so-called “developed” cultures. 45 Colonial projects prioritized “the human over the nonhuman and the subhuman, the masculine over the feminine, the adult over the child, the historical over the ahistorical, and the modern or progressive over the traditional or the savage.” 46 We see this pattern reproduced in words, images, and flesh, as living colonized bodies were literally displayed in museums in the (ironically) so-called mother countries. Most famously, Sarah Bartmann, the so-called Hottentot Venus, was displayed mostly naked as a museum exhibit forced to embody as a site of dehumanizing fascination that was rendered in drawings and reinforced dehumanization in the colonial imagination. 47 Even in his drawings of his relationship with Joanna, Stedman initially depicts her as naked and later as clothed, but in both cases many times smaller in size in comparison with his own self-portrait. The cover of acclaimed Suriname author Cynthia McLeod’s The Cost of Sugar includes William Blake’s “A Surinam Planter in His Morning Dress,” depicting a half-naked, barefoot slave woman serving a drink to a well-dressed white man three times her size. 48 Colonizing hierarchies that became embedded in the transhistorical Western sense of self as well as in masked identities of colonized human beings continue to appear in media and other representations. 49 Problematic representations endure today. In 2011 I visited the Netherlands for the first time. As a white United States citizen, I was much more familiar with Suriname than with its representations in the Netherlands, its former colonizing country. Representations of my partners and friends from Suriname jumped out at me throughout the visit through images. Thankfully, I partnered with women’s studies professor and scholar of Suriname history and culture Gloria Wekker, who helped me navigate this disruptive experience. Imagine my surprise to see in person a monument that had been installed in 2006 in Amsterdam memorializing Anton de Kom, the Surinamese nationalist exiled to the Netherlands who became part of the Dutch resistance movement in World War II, who died in a Nazi concentration camp, and whose political activism and writings influenced the vote for independence in Suriname in the 1970 s. Rather than the suits and hats he was known for, there he was, represented as a naked black man emerging from black stone. According to a recent reflection, “the Dutch sculptor had rendered him for posterity as a half naked noble savage, an ‘honour’ that would never befall a white politician or writer.” 50 This representation in stone continues to dehumanize de Kom, who in his 1934 We Slaves of Suriname had written, “It took a long time... before I had freed myself of the obsession that a Negro was always and unconditionally the lesser beside any white person.” 51 When one is open to the shared woundedness that colonialism still marks on human relationships, witnessing such dehumanizing representations is deeply troubling. Exhibits at the Ninsee, the national organization whose mission is to facilitate recognition of the history of slavery in the Netherlands, were more familiar in that they respected and represented Surinamese as human beings. However, recognition, for example, in the form of a national memorial to Dutch slavery installed in 2002 continues to evoke national debate in the Netherlands about how to bridge a past that is so psychologically challenging across multiple perspectives. 52 In Suriname, in the United States, and in our postcolonial context in general, embodiment is problematically inscribed with representing varying social power and privilege. When will we acknowledge rather than continue to perpetuate colonizing representations of human beings? Today development is measured in terms of overall health, other biological factors such as life expectancy, economic wealth, educational opportunities and literacy rates, inequality indicators, and technological and other measurable advancements. Every year since 1990, the United Nations has released a “Human Development Report” that takes into account these kinds of data to identify needs and opportunities in countries throughout the world. 53 The word development is embedded in the language of global relations where the so-called developed world is charged with the responsibility to help the so-called developing world “mature” through economic aid, debt relief, public health and other medical initiatives, infrastructural improvements, education, environmental awareness, the spread of democracy, and other initiatives. Christians have considered international global missions to be a moral and theological imperative. 54 In MoiKonde, we witnessed a range of governmental, nongovernmental, international, and religious development initiatives. Of course, we also participated in an international sustainable development initiative representing the US government abroad. Reflecting on this experience, development work can be structured in more or less empowering ways. However well intentioned, the analogy of development is often oriented toward non-recognition and therefore perpetuates misunderstanding stories. With Erikson’s developmental framework in mind, Nandy’s postcolonial criticism of developmental theory helps unmask inherent problems with the analogy. Colonialism fixed colonized human beings and countries in adolescent identity crisis with colonizers claiming the authoritative and paternalistic title of “mother country,” providing justification for the “caretaking” posture of the “more mature” colonizer. But this is a misrecognition, which thereby functions as non-recognition and aims to render passage out of cultural adolescence impossible by the very refusal of recognition. If this sounds somewhat circular, that’s because it is. In other words, colonialism uses developmental ideology to block the very thing development turns on: recognition. Imagining Mutuality Mutual understanding is difficult even in the best situations. Conflicting cultures and differences across languages combined with categories of inclusion and exclusion contribute to identity crises that can impede understanding one’s own experience and the experiences of others. Appealing to experience, we know that life trajectories are often thicker and messier than nine identifiable stages would suggest. Developmental theory is at best an ambiguous analogy for global relations and remains highly complex given the layers of deeply embedded structural oppression that characterize the present day as postcolonial. To foster possibilities for transcending developmental or other traditional categories, leaders in faith communities must be willing both to engage persons who embody narratives counter to normative theories and to participate in the creation of new places of and analogies for liberative, empowering relationships in which human beings across a range of differences and struggling with a range of identity crises can experience belonging. Alternative models for intercultural relationships are more liberative than developmental psychology. Some, such as a model of equal regard 55 or a model that focuses on capabilities of what one can be or do in context, 56 can still be problematic because they assign familial roles or measure human capabilities across cultural differences. One model likens development work to lubricating gears so that intercultural conversation unfolds naturally. 57 Models that recognize movement and uncertainty in intercultural understanding are more promising. 58 I advocate a model of sustainable partnership facilitated through narrative strategies and oriented toward mutual recognition. 59 Narrative combined with critical dialogue and the value placed on provisional understanding in this book offer insight regarding how to hold normative developmental theory in tension with embodied narratives that transcend normative categories. As one scholar writes, “Stories are never perfect answers, but they allow us to ask the questions in different ways and try on different responses.” 60 Narratives help facilitate recognition of human experience as difficult to categorize. 61 One way to counter the generalizations about human development embedded in modern society is to tell and retell stories by accounting for details of experience, networks of relationships, interpersonal and intercultural encounters within social systems, and feelings and worries, particularly what can be identified as one’s own. Telling and retelling stories allows secrets and silenced grief and pain to find a voice through which to emerge. 62 Theologically, telling and retelling stories is the healing and prophetic work of lamentations. Lamentation is a spiritual practice not often identified as a resource for navigating experiences of identity crisis. Identifying lamentations as a justice-making practice, pastoral theologian William Blaine-Wallace writes the following: “The grieving and aggrieved need a predictable and consistent audience for telling and retelling their stories, over and over again... [because] there is no telling how often stories of sorrow and tragedy need repeating in order for a new perspective, a glimpse of meaning, an unforeseen path, a previously unimaginable forgiveness, a once-closed future to open.” 63 Blaine-Wallace refers to the need for this kind of narrative lamentation that recognizes the identity crises of everyday life, including the losses and gains of developmental changes. 64 Full and complete emergence of stories as ways of thinking about experience continues to escape even those who pay careful attention to narrative nuances; therefore, Blaine-Wallace and Zaner and you and I continue to tell and retell stories. Narrative serves as a vehicle for interpretation and reinterpretation of shared experience that has the power to affect systems and open new possibilities of understanding. To resist the colonizing use of developmental psychology is to tell and retell counter-narratives that resist and disrupt Western notions of linear time that unfold neatly on a more or less predictable developmental trajectory. Nandy recommends we focus on immediate social needs, combined with disrupting linear notions of time to emphasize the “all-embracing permanent present, waiting to be interpreted and reinterpreted.” 65 Disruptive narrative strategies of poetry and laughter become practices of resistance that can appropriately trouble colonizing dualistic categories 66 by breaking out of exclusive dualisms and moving toward recognizing multiplicity as part of healthy identity formation: This century has shown that in every situation of organized oppression the true antonyms are always the exclusive part versus the inclusive whole—not masculinity versus femininity but either of them versus androgyny, not the past versus the present but either of them versus the timelessness in which the past is the present and the present is the past, not the oppressor versus the oppressed, but both of them versus the rationality which turns them into co-victims. 67 A more “fluid self-definition” with somewhat permeable boundaries embraces inherent human complexities and ambiguities. Psychologically, resolution of identity crisis that recognizes legacies of colonialism affecting present-day psychology resists a tight, mechanistic split between self/not-self, me/not-me, self/other, we/they, us/them, etc. 68 Pastoral theology has embraced resistance as a core function of good enough care that supports liberation and empowerment in lived experiences. Strategies of resistance are those practices oriented toward recognition: “[Anyone] who sees every being [in his or her] own self and sees [himself or herself] in every other being, [he or she], because of this vision, abhors nothing.” 69 Rather than delivering a final conclusive interpretation, an integrated vision of human beings in encounter who navigate both prior knowledge and an ethical imperative for continual learning integrates academic rigor and practices of neighbor love. 70 Recognition Begins with Assent Misunderstanding stories in MoiKonde evoked layers of personal and communal identity crisis, including the best way to understand identity crisis and how to address it in community. Developmental psychology has been used by analogy as a strategy of dehumanization played out in historical colonialism by limiting opportunities of success to those in power at the expense of dehumanizing those whose power has been strategically minimized. While modern developmental psychology recognizes the centrality of identity crisis in experiences of normal growth over the lifespan, postcolonial theorists unearth ways in which developmental theory has instituted rather than resolved identity crises through colonizing languages, images, theories, and practices. Both Erikson’s modern developmental psychology and Nandy’s postcolonial criticism of developmental psychology view recognition as essential for healthy development and endurance of identities. Erikson sees recognition as both a gift offered and capacity gained in the course of life through the major identity crisis in adolescence. Nandy interrogates how stage theories have served historically to impede recognition by opening pathways to development for some persons at the expense of others, which, he argues, diminishes the fullness of identity and increases a sense of constant identity crisis for all human beings. This chapter has argued for the importance of turning and returning to narrative to be accountable for how and to what end identity crisis is storied. Any model has embedded norms and values that include and exclude by framing experience. Neither Erikson nor Nandy nor you nor I have the luxury of an Archimedean standpoint from which to examine the ebbs and flows of identity across the lifespan from outside of our postcolonial lived experience. Embodied narratives of lived experience testify to our essential embeddedness in the thick of our own and others’ unfolding identities. In a world characterized by increasingly diverse intercultural networks of relationships, misunderstandings stories contribute to and are consequences of identities in crisis. In this intercultural world shaped by the legacy of colonialism, is it such a bad thing to recognize multiplicity within a soul? Rather than worry about the inherent value of identifying more than one facet of any particular human being’s experience of soul, healthy growth, change, movement, and shifts in identity are more about recognizing and navigating multiplicity within my sense of self, my sense of other human beings with whom I share the world, and my sense of constant becoming in relation to other human beings. Neurologist Oliver Sacks notes: “It is all too easy to take language, one’s own language, for granted—one may need to encounter another language, or rather another mode of language, in order to be astonished, to be pushed into wonder, again.” 71 Misunderstanding stories in intercultural relationships reveal just how challenging it is to identify oneself and others in the midst of the translation work required for cross-contextual fluency. Recognition begins with assenting to the personhood of other human beings as neighbor. This also throws me back on myself, which I can expect to raise questions for me around my previously held assumptions grounded in problematic yet historically reified dehumanizing representations. Encountering an other around language, particularly language used to frame identity crises, can provoke “an unexpected perspective on the human condition” 72 in which I am at once neighbor and stranger. Resolving the identity crises we experience and share requires practices, social structures, and theologies that support recognition. Telling and retelling our misunderstanding stories in which we human beings suffer and perpetuate suffering through dehumanizing strategies dependent on theories of “development” invite reconstructing narratives to “[open] up the present and the future” 73 to questions of “who am I?” and “who are we?” in order to participate in more liberative and more mutual relationships of intercultural understanding. Recognition activates the challenging practice of thinking that opens pathways for cognitive love through telling and retelling stories graciously not at the expense of our neighbors, but in their presence as we learn what we share and celebrate where we differ. 1. “Self-structure” is a conceptual term from Kohut’s self psychology. 2. National Public Radio, “For a Bilingual Writer, ‘No One True Language.’” 3. Firmat, Literature and Liminality. See also the concept of neplanta in Gloria Anzaldúa’s Borderlands, signifying a state of perpetual “torn between ways” where the process of conversation can flow from a crying out and can navigate identity borders toward hope rather than despair or endless frustration (Anzaldúa, Borderlands, 100 ). 4. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 80. 5. We must “consider how emerging human strengths, step for step, are intrinsically beset not only with severe vulnerabilities that perpetually demand our healing insight, but also with basic evils which call for the redeeming values of universal belief systems or ideologies” (ibid., 60 – 61 ). 6. For example, Erikson theorizes that basic trust formed in the relationship of an infant with his or her parents conflicts with basic mistrust. When an infant resolves this conflict in his or her relationships with others, the virtue of hope is generated and incorporated into this child’s identity. Like other psychologists, Erikson refers to only the mother because of the modern understanding of the mother as primary caretaker. As later stages suggest, the encounters through which children resolve the core crisis of trust versus mistrust affect other developmental transitions as well. For example, Erikson argues that parents often experience growth of children in a way that contributes to their own stage-appropriate core crisis. 7. Erikson, Childhood and Society, 219. 8. Ibid., 49. 9. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 56 – 57, 123 ff. 10. Erikson, Childhood and Society, 211, 77. 11. Ibid., 237 – 46. 12. Ibid., 331. 13. Ibid., 49, 235 – 36. 14. Ibid., 421 – 24. While conversation with theories of social schooling advanced by Michel Foucault would be interesting here, this work is beyond the scope of this book. 15. For example, the 2012 tragic killing of Trayvon Martin in Florida, which sparked international attention, shows how appearance and caricature can lead to harm, even death, when interpreted incorrectly (for example, see Fung, “Geraldo Rivera: Trayvon Martin’s‘Hoodie’”; Lomax, “Who’s Going to Sing a Black Boy’s Song.” 16. Miller-McLemore, Let the Children Come; Brennan, The Vocation of the Child. 17. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 24. Erikson writes of the status of clinical experience as a “clinical ‘specimen’ as a springboard for theoretical discussion” ( Childhood and Society, 49 ). 18. Erikson claims that “as we proceed to the next proceeding stage it should above all prove to have been developmentally indispensable for the later stages” (Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 66 ). Interestingly, a recent leadership development theory inspired by Erikson makes the same claim—that mastery of each level is required for attempting to negotiate the challenges of the next level. The author claim that “so far, we’ve found no exceptions to this pattern” (Joiner and Josephs, Leadership Agility, 12 ). 19. Liebert, “Seasons and Stages,” 20. 20. Erikson, Childhood and Society; Liebert, “Seasons and Stages.” 21. See Associated Press, “Dutch MPs Want to Give Anne Frank Posthumous Citizenship.” 22. Mitchell, Plantations and Death Camps. 23. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 64 —a description of “old age.” 24. Mitchell, Plantations and Death Camps. As another example, Erikson also fails to extend exceptions to sick children who live a lifetime in a shorter number of years and who often experience the role reversal of caring for their parents during their own dying process much earlier than expected. 25. For example, he tells a story of how he was moved in a particular experience with a client, a young African American boy whom he asked to construct an imaginary movie scene on a small table. Erikson had already drawn some conclusions from years of collected experiences with this exercise with other clients and discerned patterns of differences between the kinds of scenes constructed by boys in comparison with girls. However, the scene constructed by this particular child was different from all others. The African American child constructed his scene under the table. Erikson concludes that this child “offers stark and chilling evidence of the meaning of his smiling meekness: he ‘knows his place’” (Erikson, Childhood and Society, 98 – 99 ). Erikson’s developmental theory continues to be compelling. However, postcolonial psychologies expose and oppose developmental theories that create situations like this one, where it is not only possible but seemingly the natural order of life events that even children experience an oppressive, prejudiced, hierarchical context of life possibilities. 26. Cooper-White, Shared Wisdom; and Cooper-White, Many Voices theorize multiplicity from a pastoral psychotherapeutic perspective. 27. Copeland, Enfleshing Freedom. 28. Of note, while Nandy addresses gender as a colonizing category, he also nonetheless employs the masculine pronoun to refer to humanity throughout the text. Since the book was published in 1983, in the early years of inclusive language, we can evaluate this practice in terms of collusion with seemingly inescapable colonizing categories and also in terms of a starting point for transcending them. 29. Kiernan, quoted in Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 15 n 24. 30. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 16. 31. K. Samuel Lee nuances complicity itself with intercultural significance, calling attention to the care with which we must engage complicity in relation to cultural identities. (Lee, “Engaging Difference in Pastoral Theology”). 32. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 14 – 15. 33. Ibid., 16 – 17; See Roland, In Search of Self in India and Japan, 308, where Roland describes the cultural appropriateness of elders embodying greater wisdom and spiritual achievement. Developmental theorists like Erik Erikson or James Fowler, Carol Gilligan or Lawrence Kohlberg, also depend on a notion of age progression with implications for corresponding sexual identity. 34. Gill-Austern, “Engaging Diversity and Difference”; McGarrah Sharp, “Globalization, Colonialism, and Postcolonialism”; Volf, Exclusion and Embrace. 35. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, xiii, xv–xvi; see also Lal, Dissenting Knowledges, Open Futures. 36. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, xv–xvi. 37. He writes, “Ultimately, modern oppression, as opposed to traditional oppression, is not an encounter between the self and the enemy, the rulers and the ruled, or the gods and the demons. It is a battle between de-humanized self and the objectified enemy, the technologized bureaucrat and his reified victim, pseudo-rulers and their fearsome other selves projected onto their ‘subjects’” (Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, xvi). 38. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 97. 39. For example, see Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 48, 63. 40. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 82. 41. Dykstra, Images of Pastoral Care, 1 – 14. 42. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed, 126. 43. Van Eys, “Who Then Is Normal?” 12 – 13. 44. For example, see Stevenson-Moessner, In Her Own Time; Miller-McLemore, Also a Mother; Witte et al., The Equal-Regard Family and Its Friendly Critics. 45. Historically, this movement was represented in the philosophical idea of the great chain of being, represented in writing and art. Among the over eighty striking drawings embedded within Stedman’s journal display through art his paradoxical stance toward plantation culture, including a rendering of three naked women yoked together with thick rope. Stedman’s drawing represents a white woman in the middle leaning to one side on a representation of a South American indigenous woman, and to the other side leaning on a representation of an African woman. The caption under his eighteenth-century drawing reads “Europe Supported by Africa and America.” (The image appears in Stedman’s Surinam, 317 ). Stedman’s journal includes over eighty drawings, which were converted to engravings from Stedman’s own original drawings by a variety of eighteenth-century artists (Price and Price, “Introduction,” xxxv). 46. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, x. 47. Sharpley-Whiting, Black Venus. See also Gaskell,“Ethical Judgments in Museums,” for a broader range of ethical considerations in relation to museum exhibits. 48. McLeod, The Cost of Sugar. 49. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, xi–xiv; Sharpley-Whiting, Pimps Up, Ho’s Down. 50. Oostindie, Postcolonial Netherlands, 119, see also ibid., 97; also personal conversations in front of the monument with Dr. Gloria Wekker in May 2011. 51. Quoted in Oostindie, Postcolonial Netherlands, 149. I have not yet been able to locate a translated copy of the primary text but look forward to engaging this primary text in future research. 52. Oostindie, Postcolonial Netherlands, 148 – 59. 53. The development reports can be found online: http://hdr.undp.org/en/. 54. Here we can make a correlation to Erikson’s development as his most advanced virtue of wisdom is the only developmental virtue identified in the New Testament to describe the life of Jesus (Stevenson-Moessner, In Her Own Time, 2 ). 55. Witte et al., The Equal-Regard Family and Its Friendly Critics. 56. Nussbaum, Women and Human Development. 57. Kristof and WuDunn, Half the Sky, 242. Contributors to a critical review of Half the Sky demonstrate just how difficult it can be to envision even this model as mutually empowering (“Global Gender Inequality and the Empowerment of Women. Discussion of Half the Sky,” Review Symposium). 58. Ackerly, Universal Human Rights in a World of Difference; Narayan, Dislocating Cultures. 59. Future research could expand this model in connection with global partnerships recognized for their more mutual approaches, such as microlending and partnering in health initiatives. 60. Fuchs-Kreimer, Parenting as a Spiritual Journey, 128. The trickster theme is another way of considering multiplicity within stories while subverting the concept of “right answer” (Edwards, “Structural Analysis of the Afro-American Trickster Tale”). 61. Zaner, Conversations on the Edge. 62. Zaner, “Keeping One’s Balance in the Face of Death.” 63. Blaine-Wallace, “The Politics of Tears,” 195. 64. Ibid., 184. 65. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 57. 66. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 98. Many affirm the strategic value of humor and irony. For example, Hermans argues from a social-constructionist perspective that laughter and irony serve as “great equalizers” (Hermans, “Ultimate Meaning as Silence,” 133 ). From a pragmatic perspective, Richard Rorty also lifts up irony and poetry as strategies for living in a pluralistic world (Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity ). 67. Nandy, The Intimate Enemy, 99. 68. Ibid., 104 – 7. 69. Ibid., 108 – 9, 108 n 77, 109 n 78. 70. Ibid., 113. Again, Nandy has many interdisciplinary companions who come to similar conclusions, such as H. Richard Niebuhr in The Responsible Self, or Derrida, who argues that “history can be neither a decidable object nor a totality capable of being mastered, precisely because it is tied to responsibility, to faith, and to the gift,” which involve the undecidable, the absolutely risky, and the mysteriously transcendent, respectively (Derrida, The Gift of Death, 5 – 6; italics original). 71. Sacks, Seeing Voices, xi. 72. Sacks, “Preface,” xiii. 73. Nandy, “Themes of State, History, and Exile,” 171.