1 A Framework for Understanding Intercultural Misunderstandings I intervened in my home when a mother began to strike her daughter with my broom. In another experience, I arranged for a group of new Peace Corps volunteers to learn about cultural taboos in MoiKonde, inadvertently breaking a cultural taboo in the process. In another, I returned to my village home after a trip and learned that four young girls had not only stolen from me but had also been publicly beaten in my absence for their crime. Months earlier, in a conversation with some of these same young girls, I had come to realize some of the difficulties of engaging histories of slavery and colonialism across cultures. These brief stories merely hint at intercultural misunderstandings. In this chapter, I propose a framework for understanding intercultural misunderstandings and their dynamic nature. Anthropologist Victor Turner’s structural anthropology of ritual suggests a broad framework for understanding intercultural relationships. Turner claims that a disruption in so-called normal social relations proceeds from breach to crisis to redress to reconciliation. Turner provides a vocabulary for understanding challenges of intercultural relationships as a series of crises and efforts to repair. In a postcolonial context, conflict around identities and values can strain interpersonal and communal relationships, contributing to intercultural crises. Resolving these difficulties involves participation in intercultural relational repair. In turn, I argue, creating and enhancing opportunities for participation in processes of relational repair facilitate better theories about and practices of care in a postcolonial context. I locate the phenomena of intercultural crisis and repair in a broader academic problem of insufficient attention to postcolonial theories on the part of pastoral theologians. My primary argument is that by attending to postcoloniality as our present-day context, pastoral theologians will have a more complex understanding of culture(s) that will in turn deepen the field’s understanding of suffering exacerbated by colonialism and the possibilities of the healing work of empathy and mutuality. My primary audience is scholars, students, and practitioners in the field of pastoral theology, to whom I am extending the psychology-theology conversation to consider postcolonial theories. In addition, this project comes out of my own participation in intercultural relationships; thus, I hope that it will prove relevant to those readers who find themselves in the midst of intercultural crises and seeking to repair or restore relationships. Misunderstanding as Crisis Consider the phenomenon of crisis. Rather than chaos, which describes a disorganized and unpredictable state, the root meaning of crisis is “turning point,” after which point things get better or worse. 1 Developmental psychologist Erik Erikson certainly has this meaning of crisis in mind when he claims that developmental achievements are born from specific kinds of crises along the lifespan. 2 Crises call for response. In the context of theological education, seminaries offer resources in formation as a response to both predictable and unexpected vocational crises. Pastoral theologians call for self-reflection and imagination in response to crises of identity. One scholar calls for slowing down to invite imaginative, reflective listening in light of his claim that the hardest thing about being a pastor in the early twenty-first century is “confusion about what it means to be the pastor.” 3 Pastoral theologians also offer new stories in response to the experience of participating in a discipline in crisis. Some argue that the label of crisis applied to the discipline of pastoral theology calls for the response of ongoing work rather than a disciplinary stalemate that fails to do the work claimed as particular to pastoral theology. 4 Pastoral theologians pay particular attention to crisis because pastors, trained pastoral counselors, chaplains, and ministers in other contexts are requested and expected to respond to a variety of crises in their vocation. Howard Stone, a pastoral theologian who focuses on crisis counseling, draws on Charles Gerkin to describe crisis as a “boundary condition” where a conflict emerges between infinite aspirations and the obvious conditions of finitude. 5 More and more, ministers are confronting the same kinds of developmental and situational crises as before but with the added factor of increasing recognition of diverse identities, life experiences, and cultural differences. The phenomenon of crisis that most concerns me and that has received little attention in the field of pastoral theology to date is that which arises around cultural differences. Cultural or intercultural dimensions accompany many specific kinds of crisis experiences. 6 Few pastoral theologians who address crisis explicitly attend to culture even while many call for the field to address cultural shifts. Womanist pastoral theologians have done a better job of attending to immediate crisis situations with explicitly cultural dimensions. 7 Attention to culture(s) is not the role or responsibility of communities who have experienced the greatest marginalization; rather, attention to culture(s) is a shared responsibility of all ministers and pastoral theologians. Students often ask when they will know enough about a particular identity marker or life experience to minister responsibly around a particular identity marker or life experience. Men often ask whether they ought to refer all women to women pastoral counselors; heterosexual students often ask whether they ought to counsel homosexual congregants; white students often ask whether they ought to counsel Latino congregants. I contend that responsible ministry includes both preparation to be in community and to participate in care across differences while also building and maintaining a robust referral network in one’s local community. A referral network in this sense is not a list of names but a network based in relationships among caring professionals in the local community. 8 Responsible ministry is ministry that acknowledges and proactively learns about difference. Provisional understanding in this sense is not an excuse to eschew relationships of diversity, but quite the opposite: to cultivate diverse networks of relationships within and across faith communities. Culture(s) not only affects all kinds of crisis experiences but also draws ministers to participate in responding to crises with attention to cultural differences. While the Oxford English Dictionary describes crisis as a moment rather than a process, I use the terms crisis and repair to refer to processes within relational life that manifest various dynamics over time. I am most concerned with crises of understanding within relationships. Within a traditionally Western therapeutic tradition, a whole body of literature exists around the idea that counselors must develop multicultural competencies as essential to good and professional care to limit the risks of intercultural misunderstandings in the therapeutic hour. 9 Nonetheless, few pastoral theological resources engage a theory of culture. I redress this lack in pastoral theology by clarifying an understanding of crisis and repair that extends beyond traditional models in recognizing the intercultural nature of relationships. Crisis in Context Crises that occur within and between seemingly distinct communities always include layers of intrapersonal, interpersonal, and familial dimensions. Relational psychologies argue that each individuated person experiences a sense of self that includes a vibrant internal world filled with representations of other people and experiences. The internal world represents a matrix of relationships in which persons internally experience themselves and other people. 10 Social psychologists argue that greater connection to other people corresponds to greater personal uniqueness. These theories hold together the idea of individuated selves embedded in webs of interconnected relationships. 11 Process theologians argue that there is no distinct individuated person apart from one’s relationships and overlapping connections with other people. 12 Philosophers and philosophical theologians also question the possibility of identifying a separate self apart from other selves. 13 One way in which persons are deeply relational is within the internal world itself. Although impossible to isolate from the interpersonal context, intrapersonal crisis and repair—conflicts within one’s self—often take a variety of forms. For example, object relations psychologist D. W. Winnicott argues that healthy persons experience real connections between a rich inner life and relationships with other people in the “external world.” In contrast, unhealthy persons or persons experiencing pathologies might lead a rich inner life but experience limited connections between an inner world and real persons in external reality. 14 Layers of embeddedness in relationships blur stark boundaries between inner and outer experiences as two isolated states of being. Winnicott characterizes health according to depth of personal awareness of and active participation in real relationships with other people. Persons in all kinds of developmental stages experience crisis and repair in their internal worlds through their participation in a complexly relational life. Consider the kinds of personal thinking or discussion within one’s internal world that accompany major life transitions such as trauma, marriage, divorce, job change, birth, or death. Or, consider the rich interior life associated with more mundane yet still challenging experiences such as travel, parenting, and vocational discernment. Both extraordinary and mundane life experiences lend themselves to personal reflection in which persons internally interact with representations of other people, places, and experiences. The inner life includes crisis and repair around disconnection between expectations and experiences. The higher the stakes, the more crisis-like these disconnections can feel. Intrapersonal crises involve conflicting perspectives within one’s internal world. The popular activity of internet blogging allows persons to illustrate and communicate this struggle with others. For example, notice the many experiences and relationships included in the following blog: All of my adult life I have had friends and family tell me how amazing I am... The truth is that when they told me I was amazing I did not believe them. The other truth is that I was running myself into the ground trying to do everything, something that wasn’t healthy for my children or for me. I was so busy trying to be more that I didn’t realize how amazing I was already... Why is it that we can... see that “amazing quality” in everyone but ourselves?... That is why I am admitting today that I am pretty amazing!... We all need to look ourselves in the mirror and see how amazing we are. I have many women in my life that support, encourage, and inspire me every day and I simply don’t tell them enough!... I wouldn’t be as amazing as I am without all of you! 15 This blogger gives her readers—both known and anonymous—a sense of the ways in which her friends, family, experiences, and expectations dynamically reside within her internal world. Blogging does what letter writing once commonly did in expressing the internal world of one person to others. Consider the following excerpt from the published letters of someone more familiar to pastoral theologians: I have just returned after a day spent in the same place which we visited eleven years ago. I have wandered through the chestnut woods where we took lunch and where, but for your watchfulness, I might have started a forest fire... I need not speak of the memories which these places brought back to me, memories full of unutterable sorrow for that which might have been. This I foresaw when I went...Then came a hopeful thought. Though I may not send you the few little flowers I have gathered and have sent them to Mother instead... I can tell you of the acres of growing flowers which I have found and of the thought of you which they have brought to me... And I am wondering if I may not have found to-day a better understanding of you and of the possibilities of our relationship one to the other. 16 In this excerpt from a letter to a woman he loved, founder of modern-day pastoral theology Anton Boisen demonstrates that his internal world is populated by representations of other people drawn from memories and connected to his hopes and dreams. Both self-reflection and interaction with other people inspire new insights of self-awareness within the internal world. Certainly new insights gained by intercultural interactions also affect one’s sense of self. 17 A process of intrapersonal repair involves interaction with real, external persons in order to inspire movement from a heightened sense of internal angst toward a sense of internal resolution, understanding, insight, or “being at peace” or one with external reality. A process of repair involves considering a dynamic continuum of movement and interaction within one’s internal sense of self. Healthy intrapersonal life always exists alongside relationships with other persons. Interpersonal crises involve two or more persons engaged in a personal relationship. Experiences of interpersonal crisis include the more mundane and the more challenging. Sometimes called interpersonal conflict based on a conflict-resolution model, interpersonal crisis includes disagreements, misunderstandings, or other minor or major harms between persons. Crisis elicits questions and self-reflection: Who am I? Who are you? How can we each understand our relationship with one another? How does our relationship fit into our experiences and beliefs about the larger world in which we live? A process of interpersonal repair calls persons to respond to these kinds of questions in a way that restores functioning in a “good enough” relationship. 18 Navigating multiple relationships contributes to even greater complexities of relational life. Familial relationships characterize another dimension of relational crisis and repair. Consider the various cultures that both separate and enrich cross-generational relationships within families. Engaging in a political conversation within a family can exemplify what is shared and what is contested across generations. Family-systems theorists provide numerous ways of identifying stresses and strains, as well as sources of strength, across generations within the life of families. 19 Familial crisis and repair surface in mundane arguments over dinner and bedtime as much as in collective decision making in the event of determining how to care for a dying family member. Like all of relational life, familial life is complex. Intrapersonal, interpersonal, and familial dimensions complexify relational life. All persons are embedded in multiple layers of relationships interacting with other persons and embedded in families in multiple ways. The complexity of relational life is incontestable despite continuous efforts to collapse this complexity for the sake of grasping it. Each inseparable dimension of relational life is deeply embedded in and connected to each other dimension. One’s family of origin necessarily informs one’s internal world. Internal worlds shape interpersonal relationships. Persons are always moving into and out of multiple overlapping relationships. Inevitably, conflicts occur that demand decisions about whether and to what extent to respond. Participation in social, political, and cultural contexts further complicates and enriches responses to crisis. Intercultural Contexts of Crisis Pastoral theologian Emmanuel Lartey’s conceptualization of relationships as intercultural has become a central resource for the emerging intercultural paradigm within the field of pastoral theology. Lartey, a Ghanaian theologian trained in England who now teaches in the United States, draws on his diversity of lived experience to offer a compelling understanding of the dynamic nature of human identity and experiences. He expands classical anthropological theories that depict each person as like no other, like some other, and like all other people. Each person is unique in his or her embodiment. The individuated I exists in this particular body in this particular place and time. Each person is also unique in his or her embeddedness in particular contexts. An individuated person exists within a particular family network, however one understands family. Each person has a unique constellation of narratives that make up a particular life story. At the same time, each individuated person is like some other people, sharing a “matrix of values, beliefs, customs and basic life assumptions.” 20 As French philosopher and social theorist Pierre Bourdieu claims, families and subcultures embody particular habits and dispositions. Bourdieu argues that “different groups and classes will have a different habitus, which predisposes them toward specific types of practices and the development of particular lifestyles.” 21 Other influential modern theorists like George Herbert Mead and Sigmund Freud affirm shared social spheres that originate in familial contexts and expand into larger spheres through new connections and communications. 22 While Lartey envisions individual uniqueness, he also considers persons as simultaneously involved in a matrix of communal relationships. Persons are both like no others and like some others. Lartey further claims that each individuated person is like all other people: “We are all born helpless, grow from dependence toward relative self-management, we relate to other beings and to a physical environment and ten out of ten die!” 23 Physical and social development occurs in shared intercultural spaces in which persons connect to anyone and everyone else. Lartey’s claim of common humanity resonates with Jacques Derrida’s philosophy and Henry Stack Sullivan’s psychology. Each of these theories lifts up the paradoxical nature of understanding persons as embedded within complex interpersonal relationships. In The Gift of Death, Derrida claims that death is the one thing that must be borne alone by persons. 24 According to Derrida, death unmasks the unique “irreplaceable self behind the social mask.” 25 At the same time, perhaps Derrida would agree with Lartey that the fact of historical death (as well as birth) represents the unique equalizer of individuated persons who are, in this regard, paradoxically like all other people. 26 Derrida claims the absolutely unique experience of each death; Lartey claims that all selves share in their participation in finitude. In a similarly paradoxical fashion, Sullivan claims that the more social persons become, the more individual persons become because of the unique interconnections upon interconnections within the fabric of each unique self. 27 Sullivan envisions a complex self as a social being situated historically and developmentally. 28 Both Sullivan and Derrida reinforce Lartey’s depiction of the person or self as a constellation of overlapping spheres of like no, some, and all other persons or selves. All three embrace paradox. A claim of individual uniqueness is immediately paired with claims of universal similitude and vice versa. This dynamic understanding of selves as interconnected beings in process brings together individual and social aspects of the experience of being in relationships. Lartey characterizes health as participation in differentiation and interaction among the three spheres. This understanding leads to an intercultural research methodology that “seeks always to have the others in view and therefore to hold all three in creative and dynamic tension.” 29 Intercultural theory calls pastoral theologians to acknowledge the intercultural context of interpersonal relationships, unmask violence and oppression within interconnecting spheres, and work toward conditions that deepen fulfillment, liberation, and mutuality in intercultural relationships. Acknowledging the intercultural context of interpersonal relationships includes resisting a static notion of culture. Intercultural caregiving practices are enhanced when we envision culture(s) as constantly changing, internally diverse, and internally contested. Pastoral theologians have only just begun to think about how culture(s) affects history, meaningful interplay between theory and personal narrative, ritual, empathy, self-awareness, life-giving and life-depriving practices of care and communal life, public witness, and interconnections of care and justice. 30 These themes emerged out of the 2007 annual Society of Pastoral Theology meeting on the theme of post-colonialism held in Puerto Rico. A pastoral theological engagement with Victor Turner’s structural anthropology of social relationships contributes a more robust theory of culture(s) to pastoral theology. Cultural differences shape dynamic negotiations around more or less obvious differences in identity construction, habits, values, claims of heritage, and shared memories and histories. I assume the pastoral theological tasks of acknowledging, unmasking, and working that Lartey suggests. I direct these tasks toward developing an ethics of mutuality that recognizes interculturality as an aspect of a pluralistic, globalized context. A complex context of pluralism that normalizes intercultural encounters presents even more opportunities for intercultural crises and demands a greater sense of responsibility for participation in responding to and repairing them. Victor Turner’s Structural Anthropology of Cultural Crises Anthropologist Victor Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ) argued that because crises are inevitable and important dimensions of all human relationships, coherent cultures develop rituals for repairing the damage caused by interpersonal conflicts. That Turner attended to cultural differences within his ethnographic methods makes him an important conversation partner in my study of intercultural crisis and repair. A British social anthropologist who trained in London as a student of Max Gluckman’s Manchester School, Turner is affiliated with the same school as influential anthropologist Malinowski. 31 According to Victor’s life partner, Edith Turner, their immersion in the social context of World War II and in the academic context of British structuralism inspired them to work together to find in literature and anthropology “any kind of idea which could encompass change” and resonate with an innate hopefulness in human experience. 32 The Turners used these resources to develop theories that reflect both individual experience and the life of larger social and political groups. Victor Turner advanced theories of social process, ritual symbols, play, performance, comparative ritual studies, comparative symbology, political anthropology, and medical anthropology. 33 Turner also contributed an influential body of “specialized vocabulary,” including the concepts of liminality, social drama, rites of passage, betwixt and between, and communitas. 34 These words and phrases have seeped into many areas of study and conversation. A central figure in the anthropology of religion, Turner is known, with Edith Turner, by his work articulating the profound complexity of religious symbolism within Ndembu culture in central Africa and by later work on Christian pilgrimage. 35 Turner is noted for extending an academic interest in literature and religion in his anthropological method to attending to ways in which “one’s inner life provides a key to explaining the inner life of others.” 36 According to one scholar, Turner “razed the wall between text-based or theologically based religious studies and the social sciences by resituating social sacrality within individual experience.” 37 Turner constructed an understanding of a cross-cultural ritual process from his extensive fieldwork. He argued that his structural theory of ritual applies coherently to a wide range of experiences. Like his contemporary modern academics, Turner grounds his understanding of all cultural contexts in Western theories. 38 This is a problem. Postcolonial theories encourage naming this problem and charge academics to account for participating in and resisting traditional research methods and theorizing practices. Postcolonial theories connect to dominating interpretative lenses 39 the predominance of Western practices and theories of understanding all persons. These lenses harm rather than illuminate others’ experiences. For example, the problematic term non-Western identifies others by what they are not, and defines Western as necessarily normative. Postcolonial critics ask academics to identify the extent to which we fail to recognize pluralities and difference and, correlatively, the extent of our participation in this nonrecognition for good and for ill. Pastoral theology is a discipline aimed toward understanding theologies that undergird practices of healing and minimizing harm. Therefore, as a discipline we have a moral obligation to heed warnings about problematic language rooted in our tradition as a Western academic discipline. Given the challenges of Western representation, how might Turner’s core concepts yield fresh and liberative understandings of intercultural crisis and repair? Turner structured his understanding of relationships in terms of a series of experiences between persons within discrete cultural groups. 40 He aimed for a universalizable understanding that he then tested through fieldwork in different cultural contexts. Turner recognized culture as complex and multidimensional. He also maintained possibilities of decoding, communicating, and understanding across cultural differences. From Ritual to Theatre ( 1982 ), published near the end of Turner’s life, succinctly describes his structural understanding of human experiences. In the rest of the chapter, I construct a model of understanding intercultural relationships by weaving together three of Turner’s structural theories. Turner opens up possibilities for understanding intercultural relationships that account for cultural differences within and across cultures. A Process Understanding of Crises and Reconciliations Turner developed a structure for understanding diverse forms of human experiences by exploring instances in which a breach between two or more persons threatened communal identities. Turner located what he called the ritual process within specific cultural groups. Through extensive ethnographic research, he explored ways in which relationships in particular cultures move between crisis experiences and reconciliations. He focused on ways in which cultures ritualize this movement. Turner’s articulation of this kind of movement provides an important lens into the kind of intercultural relating in which most people live. To the extent that he applies his theories to “tribal” societies, or social groups other than his own, Turner implies the possibility of intercultural understanding: “We should try to find out how and why different sets of human beings in time and space are similar and different in their cultural manifestations; we should also explore why and how all men and women, if they work at it, can understand one another.” 41 Turner incorporated the possibility of intercultural understanding into his theories. He participated in this possibility by aiming for a structural understanding of ritual relevant to diverse cultural expressions. His own position as an anthropologist theorizing about structures of culture-specific rituals other than his own, while he and his family lived among the communities they studied, further exemplifies his assumption that intercultural understanding is possible. A synthesis of three of Turner’s theories contributed to the following model of intercultural crisis and repair: Turner employed the concept of social drama, relying on his scientific and dramatic ways of understanding complex phenomena of social life. Social dramas structure experiences of disruption in relation to the normal workings of society. 42 Societies have ways of responding to conflicts among their members. Sometimes society’s rules are widely accessible through legislation and social narratives; however, many social processes are informal and not immediately accessible to someone outside the system, so to speak. Turner tried to discern a form or structure for a common processual unfolding of social drama across diverse life experiences. 43 A disruption in normalcy, according to Turner, follows from initial breach to crisis to redress to reconciliation. 44 This sequence serves as a first interlinking structure of intercultural experience: Initial Breach Crisis Experiences Redress Eventual Reconciliation German structuralist Wilhelm Dilthey inspired Turner to develop stages in the reconciliation phase. Turner conceived of reconciliation as a dynamic process that develops from perceptual core to evocation of past images to corresponding feelings to meanings that link past and present to expression. 45 I explain these concepts in more detail below. The expanded reconciliation phase serves as a second interlinking structure of intercultural experience: Perceptual Core Evocation of Past Experiences Corresponding Feelings Meanings that Link Past to Present Expression Turner envisioned each of these stages as distinct dramatic processes within societies. In the following paragraphs, I clarify these two interlinking structures of intercultural experience. Crisis is an inevitable part of all human relationships. Families, small communities such as rural congregations, and even larger communities experience disruption in the form of conflict. This claim links Turner’s understanding of relationships to present-day intercultural, feminist, psychological, and postcolonial theorists I explore in later chapters. Along with these theorists, Turner considered crisis to be a normal, even productive part of social life. Postmodern theorists and Turner share the claim that crisis and conflict—if resolved justly—can contribute to healthy ways of relating. Turner first focused on precipitating events that he called breaches. He then outlined a ritualistic process in which divergent members of society participate in concrete stages of relational repair. While Turner was hopeful that relationships can move through these dynamic stages, he recognized that the process itself likely leads to additional personal and communal crises. Turner described a breach as an event that transgresses “normal” social relations. Breaches interrupt the flow of relationships in such a way that demands a response. 46 (For example, consider the kinds of habituated responses in-person and in media representations in present-day United States airports among those privileged with access to air travel when security breaches occur. While breaches may occur among strangers, Turner focused on the phenomenon of breach within established relationships in which persons have amassed shared time(s), space(s), and histories. Parties invest in relationships through the play between shared commitments and experiences of detachment. 47 The breach leads to a crisis in which persons involved in the particular social constellation experience disruption. They might experience a tangible sense of brokenness within previously established relational bonds. This can accentuate already present conflicting emotions and uncertainties about the future. Philosophers such as Judith Butler point out that disruptions often activate emotional experiences of awe, wonder, or astonishment. 48 Turner considered a breach to be a prereflective event that initiates series of crises within relationships. Turner identified the hinge between a breach event and a crisis experience to be intentional reflection that usually includes recognizing uncertainty. A relational breach leads to experiences of crisis that initially appear to limit possibilities of recovering anything similar to the relationship’s previous status. 49 Therefore, Turner characterizes a breach as an event that necessarily involves experiences of loss. A breach of trust within friendship or among business partners can draw parties into crisis about the identity and future of the relationship and the persons involved. Even a perceived breach of trust often introduces doubt into the future viability of relationships. A breach can also accompany an impassioned disagreement, particularly around often contested subjects like religion and politics, which tend to be intimately tied to conceptions of identity. Differing conceptions of identity and human nature can quickly come into conflict when least expected. Experiences of crisis can easily lead to splinters within relationships previously felt to be “just fine.” While Turner locates splits among intracultural bonds, crises of misunderstanding also abound in intercultural relationships, especially in relation to cultural differences. At the point of intercultural breach, experiences of crisis can split along cultural or subcultural lines. Paradoxically, while crisis experiences arise because of reflecting on breaches, they also narrow possibilities for reflection. In intercultural relationships, splits might introduce, highlight, or even seem to cement various insider-outsider dynamics. Crises reveal differing cultural values, norms, and rules that may have been hidden or unapparent to persons involved in the relationships prior to the breach. 50 Crises also bring attention to normally unexpressed cultural values, norms, and rules. According to Turner, crisis is not only a time of splitting within relationships, but also a time that sparks internal reflection on the experience of breach and core values. Turner viewed splitting within relationships as a continuing feature of the ritual process. He considered the redress phase a sometimes theatrical, public forum that addresses social behavior. 51 For example, consider the formal courtroom drama that promises to redress breaches in a United States American context. Communal values, norms, and rules find expression through ritualized dramatic social responses. Relational brokenness along cultural, subcultural, familial, gendered, racialized, and other seemingly distinct lines can lead to exclusive forms of ritualistic redress. For example, one family enacts redress in such a way that persons outside the family do not participate or might even be unaware. At the same time, this familial process affects and is deeply connected to social relationships between members of this family and other families. While Turner argued that redress is a shared, communal, public event, it also necessarily occurs, at least initially, in a limited and privileged space among persons who share particular understandings of social structures for response and redress. While redress is an initial communal response to crisis after the breach event, it is still only a beginning. Both experiences of crisis and efforts toward redress highlight various fault lines in relational matrixes within and across cultural differences. Efforts toward redressing relational breaches also accentuate the particular breach. Turner thus considered reconciliation to be a structured, communally embodied process of response. As noted above, Turner proposed a theory of reconciliation that unfolds as stages within the social drama, progressing from perceptual core to evocation of past images, to connection to feelings, to meaning, to expression. According to Turner, each subphase of what I am calling a larger ritualistic process of repair has a particular structure that draws divergent participants progressively more deeply into the communal process. Each subphase intensifies the risk that the relationship will move away from rather than toward eventual reconciliation. Turner, following Dilthey, considered the first stage of reconciliation to be the ability to identify a perceptual core, or the disruptive experience itself. 52 The perceptual core of a breach is in some ways the pre-reflective human experience of pain that triggers the pit-in-the-stomach or angry interpretation: something is terribly wrong. For example, consider the breach that occurs when a retirement or medical diagnosis 53 disrupts a family’s or society’s core narrative of identity around leadership of elders. This is a prevalent situation with local church, denominational, or seminary leadership transitions, especially when these changes come in the wake of crises. 54 Cultural factors contribute to the appropriate way to name, speak about, and reflect on this interruption. Cultural-specific rules and customs make intercultural understanding difficult and intercultural misunderstanding likely. Further, intercultural uncertainty is even more pronounced when forced disempowerment is a contributing factor in a family’s or society’s need to respond in the midst of crisis. For example, like other “developing” countries, histories of forced relocation within Suriname contributed to the context of the misunderstanding stories analyzed in this book. 55 As in the redress phase, articulating the perceptual core in an intercultural breach appears to be culture-specific because of the need to appeal to language. The raw communal experience of crisis is destabilizing and threatens to cement impasses while opening new possibilities. This is one reason why the pastoral theology seminary classroom is not the place to analyze raw experience, even while teaching the theological significance of self-aware ministry that finds appropriate outlets for recognizing and attending to the minister’s raw experience. 56 Reconciliation’s perceptual core is full of existential questions: Why does the future suddenly seem so fragile? Who are we if we cannot be in relationship? What is relationship without understanding? Was it really ever as good as I thought it was? Existential questions perpetuate cycles of crisis in the internal world. Turner claimed that identifying the present perceptual experience evokes images of the past with unusual clarity. 57 The present state of relationships is compared to a past vision of stable, sustainable, or at least unproblematic status quo. On a precipice of possible change, persons must navigate and evaluate temptations to settle back into past structures. This is as old as the Israelites contemplating turning back to oppressive conditions just when change—albeit uncertain and necessarily difficult work—is not only possible, but already beginning to be embodied (Exodus 14 ). Even today, persons facing crisis remember “the way it used to be” or “the old days” or “the early days” with unusual clarity. Moments of remembering highlight connections while also making palpable the risks of further estrangement and miscommunication within relationships. In an intercultural context, personal memories of culturally specific and interculturally shared past experiences pervade this process. Evocation of past memories in relation to an identifiable perceptual core solicit connection while also interrupting culturally specific rituals of redress. Differences in cultural values, norms, and rules reveal vastly different ways of being, speaking, acting, and embodying that can feel incommensurable. This divergence coexists in contrast to clear, even romanticized, images of past intercultural harmony evoked in the perceptual moment. For example, consider the ways in which after the events of September 11, 2001, some United States Americans remembered past intercultural global harmony, while others saw the event as unmasking a naïve, romanticized vision of prior global harmony. Turner, again relying on Dilthey, claims that past images renew feeling states associated with the experience of remembering. 58 Persons, families, friends, and communities begin to remember by accessing feeling states that predate the breach. Feelings express both culturally specific and shared intercultural communal ways of relating. The convergence of past memories in the present act of remembering also accentuates crisis. Turner claimed that meaning links the past to the present by distinguishing between the “value” and the “meaning” that can emerge en route to more complete reconciliation. The distinction between value and meaning here is that meaning is a process of making sense of various values that often are not thought of as ordered and/or connected. 59 Reconciliation is more complete when it involves parties—from the various splits that the crisis accentuates—into the process of meaning making. If, with Turner, we consider reconciliation’s end as an articulated memory that respects multiple perspectives and is therefore accessible across differences, then the meaning-making process invites different ways of speaking different experiences into robust conversation. Eventually with sustained attention to and participation in the meaning-making process, something new breaks in. A new possibility, word, image, or understanding creates the conditions for an open future with respect to this particular strained relationship within this particular intercultural moment. Turner highlighted expression as the ultimate and somewhat elusive stage in reconciliation. Expression completes a cyclical, processual turn within the larger social drama. 60 Turner differentiated between initial attempts at expression and more integrated, longer lasting, creative, artistic interpretations of reconciliation. 61 Consider the difference between monuments erected in the immediate aftermath of a tragic loss compared to those that are more permanent and enduring, yet no less meaningful. For example, in the recent event of the devastating earthquake in Haiti, immediate forms of expression included primarily mixed media news reports and documentary-style communal processing. In time, films, monuments, and other artistic expressions will strive to make meaning of something so senseless and tragic in forms incorporated into larger social narratives across cultural differences. Such expression is not quickly achieved; in fact, according to Turner, inevitably premature efforts toward expressing reconciliation intensify interpersonal splits and move relationships away from more complete reconciliation. 62 Efforts at more inclusive participation continue to highlight the limits of interpersonal and intercultural understanding. The drive toward consensus among divergent voices also illustrates the dynamism always present in and among all cultures. Turner considered expression to be reached when persons within and across cultures who are both near to and far from the particular moment of initial breach can agree that a specific monument, film, or other artistic expression conveys what all of our words and efforts have failed to do: there is a past to lament and a future open to new possibilities. Turner organized social dramas by appealing to cyclical patterns of intracultural and intercultural experiences. After an initial breach, persons can move in intercultural relationships through time and space toward reconciliation. Turner wrote: “If our cultural institutions and symbolic modes are to be seen... as the crystallized secretions of once living human experience, individual and collective, we may perhaps see the word ‘experience’ itself as an experienced traveler through time!” 63 Turner understood movement from breach toward reconciliation as a normal and inevitable rite of passage within coherent and well-structured cultures. In this sense, his use of the word “experience” suggests intercultural sharing in a discernible idea that plays out in culture(s). Trying to understand across the different ways in which experience plays out in cultures contributes to problems of intercultural crisis and repair. What might it mean to consider Turner’s description as a developmental stage in intercultural relationships? To consolidate Turner’s claims about relationships, I suggest that his understanding of intracultural rites of passage provides a third interlinking structural understanding of intercultural experiences: Separation Transition Incorporation Turner’s influential theory of liminality adds an additional dynamic to the unfolding of social drama in which breaches cause separation between persons. The transition, or liminal space, emphasizes the flowing and processual nature of ritual that opens persons and groups to a sense of freedom, creativity, and possibility. 64 The next section consolidates the three interlinking structures to propose a model of understanding intercultural experience. A Framework for Understanding Intercultural Misunderstandings A structural understanding of intercultural experience draws on what I consider to be Turner’s three interlinking structures of the social drama. In an imagined landscape of intercultural experience, relationships move through stages of intercultural understanding. Each stage tends to draw participants back to crisis, which then calls again for personal and communal response, even if the response is to opt out, as I propose below. Intersecting cycles back to crisis point to the ever cyclical, never quite stable or certain intercultural experience. Reconciling processes drive toward fuller and more concrete expression even while participants remember, re-story, and imagine possibilities. The case studies of intercultural crisis and repair in the next chapter exemplify how a breach in relationship (separation) prompts a lengthy time of deep ambiguity (transition) with respect to future possibilities. A new insight can allow for mutual transformation of understanding that invites diverse participation. I assess this goal in the later analytical chapters. Eventual reconciliation, even if provisional, invites meaningful exchange where diverse persons are capable of recognizing a multiplicity of cultural identities (incorporation). The prospect of sharing in experiences of reconciliation deepens intercultural relationships by increasing possibilities for mutual understanding. Possibilities for mutual understanding exist in a context of good enough intercultural relationships. “Good enough” is an idea from object relations theory that mothers (and othermothers 65 ) will fail and that these empathic failures or “optimal failures” in a loving environment can facilitate healthy development. The classic example is the mother of a newborn who eventually cannot immediately respond to the baby’s cries. A good enough mother fails to respond immediately all the time but does not fail to respond as quickly as she can. In contrast, mothers (or othermothers) who aim for perfection and do not tolerate failures constrict possibilities for a healthy developmental environment. I adopt the concept of good enough as an analogy that to theorize about care in a context of intercultural relationships is to theorize about good enough intercultural relationships. This is most poignantly the case when we can recognize the realities of postcoloniality that impinge on self-understanding and interpersonal relationships. Can Turner be diagnostic in the common case of intercultural crisis? The model I propose below envisions that good enough intercultural relationships exist in contexts defined by ( 1 ) a processual understanding that experience is moving, rather than static or excluded from moving, ( 2 ) in which potential for repairing responses increases by inviting greater participation in the movement, and ( 3 ) that includes an imagination capable of balancing flexibility and continuity in a relational matrix of complex commitments and detachments. Given the inevitability of conflicting perspectives within intercultural relationships, perhaps the best practices of care are those practices that draw conflicting parties into participating in relational repair. Consider the following model: A two-dimensional model necessarily fails to account for the complexity of life experiences. Therefore, in the above depiction, the circles serve as reminders of the multi-dimensional processes of interacting human experiences unfolding in time and space all the time. Models like this are helpful in processes of intercultural meaning-making toward reconciliation when conversation is needed and part of the problem is the inadequacy and even destructive nature of language. Turner proposed that reconciliation at its best invites what he called spontaneous communitas, where he relied on Martin Buber to envision “a sense of unity [that] is achieved without the dissolution of individuals.” 66 One scholar describes Turner’s communitas as “the ritual leveling process containing the potential for new social arrangements, new forms of imagination, of ritualized play.” 67 New possibilities emerge in instances of communitas in which diverse persons participate with “attentiveness and affirmation” in relation to one another. 68 In other words, new possibilities become available in and across cultures even when the idea of new possibilities is suppressed. Whether communitas becomes spontaneous and full of potential, normative and reifying of established institutions, or ideological depends on the unfolding of opportunities created by the instability of crisis. 69 Turner named this hinge liminal space, where possibilities of both dangerous and “vitalizing” experiences coexist with possibilities for violence and repair and where “liminal entities” are “betwixt and between” normally recognizable forms of community. 70 Here, he distinguished communitas from everyday community by identifying ritualized spaces and times of “sacredness of that transient humility and modelessness” in which persons participate. 71 Whether participation tends toward reification or awakening new possibilities depends on collective wisdom in navigating communitas ’s “regenerative abyss” of “untransformed power.” 72 Turner’s efforts to model and structure liminal space raise tensions over how structure and possibility come together both in preparation for and analysis of experience. Good enough intercultural relationships account for the institutional brokenness of postcoloniality, allow for participation of multiple perspectives, permit uncertainty and ambiguity, and resist the perfectionist and ideological idea that relationships can or should maintain a solidified status quo. These features exceed any two-dimensional representation of even a complex theory; therefore, it is important to consider ways in which models both illuminate and constrict understanding. How does a careful examination of Turner’s anthropology of experience both enlighten and constrict liberative possibilities in understanding intercultural crisis and repair? Possibilities of Intercultural Understanding Like all models, Turner’s structural anthropology of human experiences contains strengths that open up interpretive possibilities and limitations that restrict them. Strengths include Turner’s broad applicability, his embrace of movement as an integral part of relational life, and his hopefulness that relationships can move between crisis and repair. Limitations include his Western biases, such as the idea of the anthropologist as outside observer with sufficient expertise to understand and accurately describe any coherent culture. Other limitations include Turner’s ideas around identifying and measuring successful relationships and his lack of attention to contexts in which a real impasse leads to violence and furthers crisis rather than repair. How can such a model of intercultural crisis and repair be open to postcolonial criticism? Sociologist Bobby Alexander accuses many Turner scholars of minimizing the transformative possibilities of drawing on Turner to understand social strife. In response to scholars who argue that Turner’s structural understanding can justify oppressive hierarchies, Alexander draws on case studies to show that liminal space can be inspired by and can inspire resistance. 73 Like Alexander, I also find Turner to be a helpful resource in identifying potential spaces for liberative intercultural encounters. Turner’s theories provide tools for understanding how persons might respond to intercultural crisis. His work can help persons in conflict meet an intensified and marked possibility of violence with an agenda of reform by unmasking embedded misunderstandings and inviting participation in destabilized moments. This is why Turner (like so many anthropologists and religionists) focused on ritual’s potential to bring together divergent persons by suspending a sense of concrete time and space in favor of, even if momentary, a multidimensional understanding: “Ritual not only replicates structures of experience (the ‘social drama’), it also reshapes experience.” 74 In an intercultural geography, what are the potentials for resisting and reshaping oppressive social powers and traditional hierarchies? A methodological challenge is to consider how pastoral theologians might draw on postcolonial theorists to destabilize intellectual spaces in order to unmask misunderstandings and latent oppressions while inviting new possibilities without reinscribing the same old power placeholders in the center(s). Alexander is helpful in pointing out that one methodological move is always to be ready to investigate the extent to which academic responses intend redressing societal oppression. However, I depart from Alexander by offering mutuality instead of a “drive to inclusivity” as a goal. 75 A drive to inclusivity risks minimizing intercultural embodiment by colluding in the institutionalization of articulating social reality at the expense of silencing diverse voices and experiences. I agree with Alexander in turning to liberation theology but find that additional conversation with postcolonial theorists is important for articulating and maintaining tensions when trying to understand intercultural experience. Turner’s theory of ritual antistructure is still valuable in the study of religion because of “religion’s potential to serve as a significant force for social protest and social-structural change within... Third world countries... and countries like the United States.” 76 Religion also has the potential for harm in these contexts. While Alexander sees the potential for the relevance of Turner’s theory to religious studies today, he maintains a distinction between developed and developing countries that we can now recognize as problematic with the help of postcolonial theories. Other theorists agree with Alexander that Turner can be read as foreshadowing the postmodern turn and a deeper recognition of postcoloniality. Alexander argues that Turner has been misread around claims that social rituals reinscribe oppressive social hierarchies. Instead, Alexander corrects this misreading using a case study of a black Pentecostal congregation to argue that Turner considered rituals to open liminal spaces that “relax” social hierarchies and allow for possibilities of social change and transformation. 77 Engelke affirms that throughout his writings, “Turner did indeed primarily want to show how ritual was creative, not a means of confirming the social status quo.” 78 Other theorists point to Turner’s inclusion of reflexivity within his structural understanding of social drama. 79 Turner’s reflexivity displays a pragmatic invitation to discern what matters by imagining consequences. In 1995, Donald Weber echoed critical voices, such as Renato Rosaldo, to argue that scholarship using the physical site and metaphor of the “border” has advanced Turner’s concept of liminality in a way that is more adequately responsive to current social realities. 80 While some praise Turner for envisioning a liminal structure with inherent potential to recognize marginal persons and inspire social protest, 81 Weber doubts the continued influence of Turner’s structure of social drama because of a latent imperialist tone that prizes consensus, sets a goal of resolving social conflict, and lacks the legitimate option to refrain from participating in social drama as a form of marginal protest. 82 Weber claims that Turner misses “a conception and recognition of culture as political contestation: the battle over narrative power, the fight over who gets to (re)tell the story, and from which position.” 83 Weber argues that theorizing “borders” extends Turner’s methodological insistence on both human experience and interdisciplinary study to an orientation more open to various forms of hybridity, multiplicity, and ambiguity. 84 Within the same year that Weber was writing on Turner, Bennetta Jules-Rosette argued that Turner contributed to “decentering ethnography and repositioning the postcolonial subject” by shifting the ethnographer from an “omniscient stance” to an “empathetic interpreter in a cross-cultural dialogue.” 85 Jules-Rosette argues that Turner must be read as a crucial figure in the transition from a colonial to a destabilizing postcolonial anthropology that focuses on dynamic processes surrounding personal narratives. 86 She further asserts that Turner considers the Ndembu not as “passive colonial subject” but rather as “active agents in social change” among whom many voices participate in an ethnographic dialogue or trialogue. 87 Jules-Rosette raises the question of whether and how the academic can learn from his or her subject of study. She envisions a destabilizing ethnographic practice that matters in response to the suffering implicit in the human condition, even as envisioned by practitioners who unwittingly participate in a colonial order because of the very nature of Western academia. 88 Is Jules-Rosette right that ethnographers can participate so well in the social drama through their own struggle that liminal possibilities transcend barriers of culture, class, ethnicity, knowledge, or power in the emergence of “a new, plural reflexivity”? 89 Can Turner’s theories help us imagine a mutuality that “overcome[s] the dichotomy between commitment and detachment” in academic practice? 90 Weber inspires a postcolonial challenge worth our consideration: Does using Turner’s theory obscure or enlighten borders? Can a model based on Turner reconcile authentic social experience with the ambiguities of hybridity? Is there another side to Turner’s imagined liminal threshold? Do Turner’s theories of social experience correlate to postmodern projects that try to resist the concrete and to postcolonial projects that try to unmask our habituated forms of oppression? Conclusion The proposals and questions of this chapter arise from lived experiences of intercultural crisis and repair. In reflecting on intercultural experiences, Turner provides a helpful lens to resist strategic dehumanization, which later chapters theorize with reference to a dominating “gaze.” Anthropology comes “alive in human interaction” in a way that allows human experience, particularly ritual experience, to emphasize the play within the usual “coldness of academic demand.” 91 Engelke points out that methodologically, Turner performs the faith that the other with whom he is in relationship not only has something to teach him about anthropology but also has the power to impart transformative wisdom regarding the inner life. 92 In this way, Turner frames a structural understanding of intercultural relationships that draws participants into risky liminal spaces full of possibilities. The following chapter continues to investigate the extent to which a model of good enough intercultural relationality based on Turner might open possibilities for a pastoral theological engagement with postcolonial theories. Each of the experiences at the beginning of this chapter presented crises in intercultural understanding that threatened to sever relationships and evoked intense feelings. In chapter 2, I look at these and other experiences more closely to move us toward recognizing the prevalence of intercultural misunderstanding so that we can better understand and practice theology in our postcolonial context. 1. “Crisis,” 27. 2. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed. 3. Barnes, The Pastor as Minor Poet, 4, 123 – 36. 4. Dykstra, Images of Pastoral Care; McGarrah Sharp and Miller-McLemore, “Are There Limitations to Multicultural Inclusion?” 5. Stone, Crisis Counseling, 2. 6. See typologies of crisis in Switzer, The Minister as Crisis Counselor, 32 – 33. 7. For example, Ali, Survival and Liberation. 8. Kornfeld, Cultivating Wholeness, 41, 69 – 70, 92 – 94, 310 – 11. 9. For example, McGoldrick, Ethnicity & Family Therapy. It is interesting to note the major transformations in content and form from one edition to another, given the increasing and increasing recognition of cultural diversity in the United States. 10. For example, Winnicott, Playing and Reality; Kohut, How Does Analysis Cure? 11. Sullivan, The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry; Mead, Mind, Self & Society. 12. Whitehead, Process and Reality. 13. Burkitt, Social Selves; James, Pragmatism. 14. Winnicott, Playing and Reality. 15. Rigler, “Challenge and Hooray for Amazing Women.” Online: http://katy-uncooked.blogspot.com/ 2009 / 08 /challenge-and-hooray-for-amazing-women.html /. 16. Boisen, Out of the Depths, 145 – 47. 17. For a classic example, see Geertz, “Deep Play.” 18. I further develop the concept of “good enough” to describe healthy intercultural relationships in the following chapters. I adapt this concept from object relations theories, which use it to describe relationships (modeled on the infant-mother relationship) that recognize limitations, possibilities, and responsibilities of persons oriented in relationship with other people (Winnicott, Playing and Reality ). 19. McGoldrick et al., Ethnicity & Family Therapy; McGoldrick, You Can Go Home Again. 20. Lartey, In Living Color, 34 – 35. 21. Burkitt, Social Selves, 132 – 33; Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice. 22. Burkitt, Social Selves, 41. 23. Lartey, In Living Color, 34. 24. Derrida, The Gift of Death, 1 – 34. See also Wolff, Surrender and Catch, 30 – 31. 25. Derrida, The Gift of Death, 36. 26. The situation is made infinitely more complex when we consider contestations throughout the history of religion and more recently in the discipline of biomedical ethics over the meaning and definition of birth and death. 27. From conversation with Dr. Barbara McClure in 2007. 28. Sullivan, The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. 29. Lartey, In Living Color, 35. See also Lartey, Pastoral Theology in an Intercultural World. 30. Several pastoral theologians address these and other themes in the Journal of Pastoral Theology 17 / 2 (Fall 2007 ). 31. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 161; Engelke, “The Problem of Belief,” 6. 32. Engelke, “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 844. 33. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 162; Jules-Rosette, “Decentering Ethnography,” 160. 34. Weber, “From Limen to Border,” 526. I explain communitas below. 35. Engelke, “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 4; Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 162. 36. Engelke “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 8. 37. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 163. 38. I recognize this tradition of the Western academy in which I participate by using Turner’s theories to understand dynamics of present-day intercultural relationships. I hope that my appeal to intercultural experience in this book contributes to a more dialogical project than does a traditional one-way application of Western theories to explain the rest of the world. I also take up the methodological problem of voice across the chapters. 39. In later chapters, I elaborate this point through critical engagement with Frantz Fanon’s notion of the Western gaze. 40. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre. 41. Ibid., 8. 42. Ibid., 10. 43. Engelke “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 846. 44. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 10 – 11. 45. Ibid., 11 – 15. 46. Ibid., 10. 47. See Jules-Rosette, “Decentering Ethnography.” 48. See for example, Judith Butler’s description of the experience of wonder in light of disruption in her foreword to The Erotic Bird: Phenomenology in Literature by Maurice Natanson, ix–xiv. 49. See Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 10 – 11. 50. Disruption often characterizes a starting point for learning and for pedagogical reflection (for example, hooks, Teaching to Transgress ). 51. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 11. 52. See ibid., 13 – 14. 53. See Blaine-Wallace, “The Politics of Tears,” for one of many examples of the need to address family leadership transitions prompted by a family elder’s medical diagnosis. 54. For example, see studies of church leadership in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans (Blue, “Spiritual Mothers and Midwives”) or New York immediately after September 11, 2001 (Swain, Trauma and Transformation at Ground Zero ). 55. Walsh and Gannon, Time Is Short. 56. Cooper-White, Shared Wisdom. 57. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 14. 58. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 14. 59. Ibid., 14 – 15. 60. Ibid., 15 – 19. 61. Ibid. 62. Future research could explore whether reconciliation is always between persons or also between persons and events. For example, in relation to September 11, 2001, do persons reconcile with the event in a separate process from reconciling with others who may have contributed to the event, which may never occur? Another example of reconciling differently with person and event arises in the international uproar over the release of the primary Lockerbie bombing suspect in August 2009. 63. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 17. 64. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 161 – 62. 65. Bonnie Miller-McLemore, drawing on womanist theologians, considers “othermothers” to be “anyone who cares for kids and is changed by it” ( In the Midst of Chaos, xvii). 66. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 163; Turner, The Ritual Process, 126 – 27. 67. Weber, “From Limen to Border,” 528. 68. Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 38. 69. Turner, The Ritual Process, 132; see also Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 30. 70. Turner, The Ritual Process, 95, 108 – 11; Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 30. 71. Turner, The Ritual Process, 97. 72. Ibid., 139. 73. Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 39. See also Alexander, Victor Turner Revisited. 74. Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 41. 75. Ibid., 39 – 40. 76. Ibid., 42. 77. Ibid., 26, 34, 40 – 41. 78. Engelke, “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 8. 79. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 162; Jules-Rosette, “Decentering Ethnography,” 173. 80. Weber, “From Limen to Border,” 525. 81. Sullivan, “Victor W. Turner ( 1920 – 1983 ),” 162; Alexander, “Correcting Misinterpretations of Turner’s Theory,” 29. 82. Weber, “From Limen to Border,” 526, 529 – 531. 83. Ibid., 532. 84. Ibid. 85. Jules-Rosette, “Decentering Ethnography,” 160 – 61. 86. Ibid., 162 – 63. 87. Ibid., 164, 168. 88. Ibid., 174. 89. Ibid., 175 – 76. 90. Ibid., 177. 91. Engelke, “An Interview with Edith Turner,” 845. 92. Engelke, “The Problem of Belief,” 8.