Introduction When my friend saw her eleven-year-old daughter playing on my porch instead of helping with the evening chores, she angrily reached for my broom. I grabbed the broomstick from her hand before she could strike her daughter with it. We were caught in an intercultural crisis. With permission of village elders, I was identifying sacred markers and taboos to encourage a new group of American volunteers to respect sacred spaces and practices. The matriarchal spiritual leader, who was also my neighbor and friend, raised her staff and scolded me for being the white man violating her people once again. We were caught in an intercultural crisis. During the three-mile walk home from an exhausting day of peanut harvesting, I asked some village children: What do you want to be when you grow up? They told me they thought they would be successful if they could leave their village, which is in a former Dutch colony, to live in the Netherlands and become fluent in Dutch culture and language. I asked if they would ever want to come to America. They told me that America is a frightening place where they would be forced into slavery and would never be free. We were caught in an intercultural crisis. I left the village setting for a month to interview for doctoral work in pastoral theology. When my life partner and I returned to the village, we learned that four of our neighbors’ children had been publicly beaten and exiled from relationship with us after breaking into our home while we were away. We were caught in an intercultural crisis. S tories of intercultural misunderstanding point to powerful moments in intercultural relationships—the summaries above are insufficient to get at their complexity—that have required and continue to require a long process of growing in relationship oriented toward mutual understanding. Stories are so important that these and others become examples along the way, with the last vignette spanning the whole book. My immersion in interpersonal misunderstanding through my experiences has afforded me insights into possibilities and challenges of intercultural understanding that I share throughout the book. The experiences of intercultural misunderstanding reflected here have a particular history. By the time I completed divinity school, I had clarified a sense of call to theological education. I also experienced a call to gain some experience before pursuing doctoral studies. As calling experiences often go, the certainty of call did not come with much clarity about the details. I had developed a healthy hermeneutic of suspicion through my first studies of liberation theology and feminist ethics in divinity school. I had studied histories of dehumanization of women and formerly colonized persons through intentional and unintentional religious practices that claimed to heal or offer special access to salvation. I also had acquired a strong appreciation for the intergenerational diversity and accompanying variety of life experiences within the seminary setting. This had not been the case for most of my education before seminary, during which I had been about the same age, give or take a few years, as most of my classmates. I needed to exit the academy, so to speak, to gather some life experience that exceeded anything I had encountered previously in order to be a more holistic scholar of pastoral theology and ethics. Since the groundbreaking writings of Anton Boisen raised connections between religious and psychological dimensions of his personal experiences of suffering, pastoral theologians have considered narratives of lived human experience to be authoritative sources in facilitating healing. This means that good pastoral care requires hearing and telling stories to learn the most just and healing ways to participate in the continual unfolding of the stories. Extending this wisdom to our current condition of postcolonialism, I realized I could not discern how to participate in justice and healing in a postcolonial context without learning about it “from below.” 1 In other words, I had to live in a former colony to learn what I needed to know. This was a privilege for me and would not necessarily be required or possible for everyone. I felt called to learn about the world from the ground up in order to understand my role in resisting and reifying dehumanization in it. Much later I would find postcolonial studies as a conversation partner also concerned with global legacies of dehumanization and ongoing violence. Along with my spouse, I decided to apply for service to the United States Peace Corps as a way to learn about the world that seemed so intangible to me from my privileged but limited classroom and text-based studies. Even in the process of applying, the intercultural context was already not neutral. All of our cultural situatedness was already in play. For example, even filling out the application for service, which one might think of as neutral, brought to the surface all sorts of conflicting values when we were asked to state “a preferred country of service.” In the midst of entering into an experience to partner with “the poor,” we could recognize our empowered choice from a place of privilege. The opportunity to state a preference about where in the developing world to serve reveals the extent of our privilege in being able to choose to serve the developing world and even the area of the developing world in which we most envisioned ourselves. Yet it also exposed the severe limits of our prior knowledge. How would we account for a preference among choices that were equally unknown to us? We did not state a preference, as we had no basis to account for such a choice. We volunteered for the secular organization of the Peace Corps because of a hermeneutic of suspicion based in learning of the depth of Christian complicity in colonialism. While no organization is without its challenges, the Peace Corps’s fundamental assumption is that Americans do not know or understand individuated persons and communities in other countries without a sustained engagement living in the same conditions as persons and communities indigenous to the host country. Further, only such sustained engagement in other countries can cultivate the kind of intercultural understanding and friendship that lead to peace in the world. One distinguishing feature of learning about and seriously engaging the whole idea of hermeneutics within theological education is that one opens oneself up to and must then live in the ambiguous contours of big questions. For me and my life partner, Christian missions became a question in which to live rather than a set of assumptions to take for granted. Although this book is not primarily about Christian missions, the intercultural understanding essential for justice in the world is certainly applicable to short- and long-term, local and global, Christian missions. There is no question regarding the historical resistance, complicity, and bystander practices of Christians in relation to global violence. The contemporary culture of fear heightens the already pressing opportunity to bring this historical knowledge to bear on moral discernment. The conversation with my young friends raised the question: What is a truthful and faithful response to worries about contemporary America being a place of limited opportunity for immigrants? As much as is possible ahead of an immersion experience, the details of our Peace Corps service were almost finalized in the fall of 2001. In September, we were waiting for an assignment of our country and context of service. In the span of a few hours, September 11, 2001 opened questions of peace and justice around cultural understanding and misunderstanding as the world seemed to come together and apart all at the same time. In the midst of this, we were preparing to represent the United States government abroad for the purposes of peace and international friendship. The complexity of questions about world relations only deepened as our actual Peace Corps experience unfolded. For example, as we were looking at the cover of a government-provided copy of Newsweek magazine with children in the rural village where we were living several months later, a child pointed to the cover and asked what the difference between a smart bomb and any other kind of bomb was. What is the difference? How would you respond? How might we understand this question theologically? Further, how does one respond in another language in wartime in a conversation between a theologically educated Peace Corps volunteer and an inquisitive child? Living in community in the ambiguity of big questions involves moments of shared vulnerability and learning required for understanding. The ebbs and flows of mundane life often disrupt these moments when our general state of misunderstanding becomes more acute, threatening to cloud out and cover over shared questions. This book argues that misunderstanding and understanding are not so much achievements as they are moments in lifelong processes. Both moments of misunderstanding and rarer moments of understanding must be acknowledged. Understanding across differences is more challenging than misunderstanding because the former involves a willingness to recognize one’s own complicity in the latter. Understanding requires investing in processes of hearing, voicing, and approaching narrative with a hermeneutic of suspicion guided by the value of intercultural understanding as a good and a goal worthy of sustained effort. (Mis)Understanding and Stories Misunderstandings and histories of violence affect mutual understanding across diverse relationships—including within families, in local communities, in faith communities, within countries, and indeed in the twenty-first-century world of increased globalization. 2 Why is understanding such a difficult process? Is understanding even possible, considering our growing diversity and the violence that endures in our relationships and the world? This book explores two central and related concepts for pastoral theology: understanding and stories. Understanding is a goal and a good for pastoral theology as a field thoroughly relational in practices of care, theologies, and methods of inquiry. By understanding, I mean both clarity of thought and an intentional understanding of persons’ experiences. Therefore, recognizing and addressing misunderstandings are crucial. Practices of care hinge on careful attention to suffering through listening and mirroring within the context of interpersonal relationships. The character and consistency of relationships are themselves part of healing as a goal of good pastoral care. Pastoral theologies are also relational in the field’s consistent commitment to draw on human experiences as an authoritative source for theology in combination with sacred texts, theological scholarship, psychological insights, sociological and anthropological contextual awareness, and the contribution of other cognate disciplines. 3 The field of pastoral theology is deeply relational in methods of inquiry because interdisciplinary conversations structure vocabularies, practices, and theories by which we correlate different discourses for the sake of constructing theologies accountable to experiences of suffering we learn about and which call forth participation. Understanding also forms assumptions about the many contexts in which pastoral theologians work. As practical theologians, we are accountable to three publics: the church, the academy, and the public sector. 4 Each of these publics is vastly diverse and difficult to define succinctly. To communicate within and across these contexts is a complex relational endeavor. The understanding required for cross-contextual fluency and meaningful translation often eludes us, especially in a world that can reward narrow expertise and make segmented pockets of experience seem normative. In an increasingly complex world, leaders in faith communities participate in an increasingly complex network of multiple publics or spheres. Pastoral theologians also participate in multiple spheres. For example, I teach in a seminary, present my research at academic conferences and in academic publications, give workshops and lead Sunday school classes in local faith communities, attend and participate in a church, and occasionally work as a consultant in hospital clinical ethics. In every sphere of this vocation, more information and more conflicts and more striving for certainty operate in a context of less certainty. How can we become fluent in any one sphere of accountability, much less in several identifiable spheres? Theological education, which is the primary vocation of many pastoral theologians, has classically been about the work of “faith seeking understanding.” 5 Dan Aleshire, Association of Theological Schools executive director, describes the theological education that happens in seminaries through reading texts, discussing vital issues, writing, and teaching as “soul-shaping learning.” 6 Theological education provokes self-understanding required for the ongoing formation of a pastoral identity. Understanding oneself in relation to other people, other places, religious traditions, and global issues is soul-shaping work that dislodges prior misunderstandings and opens pathways for deeper understandings. Leaders in faith communities also translate this kind of transformational learning into churches, nonprofits, hospitals, hospices, military chaplaincy, and the many other contexts where vocations of ministry find expression. I am a United Methodist. Understanding is important to me in my efforts to correlate the four dimensions of John Wesley’s quadrilateral, where Scripture, tradition, reason, and experience all contribute to meeting the world’s needs by spreading my gifts and graces across the networks of relationships in which I live and work and have my being. Theologically, what is good and right contributes to tikkun olam, the Jewish expression for the mending of the brokenness in the world. Participating in this kind of justice-oriented work demands being willing to assess whether and to what extent one’s participation is in fact contributing to mending with intercultural fluency. This requires a willingness to engage processes of mutual understanding. So why is this so difficult? As a pastoral theologian, my scholarship contributes to a field in which understanding personal experience is key to possibilities of healing; therefore, it is crucial to attend to processes of dehumanization operating in local and global contexts (which are of course inseparable). Further, I must attend to the more difficult task of probing ways in which I participate in dehumanization by both deliberate and unintentional misunderstandings. This is a demanding and ongoing task of responsible ministry in culturally complex contexts. Understanding within complexly layered relational life contributes to health and healing; misunderstanding exacerbates suffering and deepens fissures in relationships. As pastoral theologians have begun our work advancing the intercultural paradigm of pastoral practice and theology, 7 we know that recognizing cultural and intercultural aspects of identities makes understanding more challenging and misunderstandings more prevalent. The problem is that intercultural misunderstandings and histories of violence provide the context for occasional moments of mutual intercultural understanding. Language and ethical categories get complicated here. If mutual understanding is a good, then participating toward this good includes carefully examining what impedes this good from being realized. All of us live within legacies of past and present unfolding histories of violence. I contend that most of us live in continual states of misunderstanding ourselves and others to a far greater extent than we live in the midst of mutual understanding. Understanding and misunderstanding turn on patterns of communication within relationships. Stories embody patterns of communication on which understanding and misunderstanding depend. From the beginning of its modern history, if not from the beginning of human effort to participate in the mysterious work of the care of souls, pastoral theology has recognized the importance of narratives. We communicate with each other through stories of lived human experience. We privilege stories in our theologies, study stories through verbatims and case studies, and affirm that our stories as caregivers, theologians, and leaders in faith communities matter deeply. We join other theologians in considering our shared biblical stories to be an important resource and guide in understanding. A hallmark of all stories, from personal experience to the biblical narrative, is the ways in which stories must be told and retold, heard and heard again, interpreted and reinterpreted over time. Processes of misunderstanding and understanding happen through stories—the stories we tell, retell, and cannot, choose not, or otherwise do not tell, as well as through the stories we hear, have heard before, and cannot, choose not, or otherwise do not hear. In postmodernity, at our best we participate in encouraging and liberating stories that have yet to be told while at the same time resisting whatever prevents the telling and hearing of stories. Postmodernity has helped us realize that narratives of discrete individuals are inseparable from the communal narratives that provide texture and background to personal narratives. Pastoral theology as a field tends to use the words self, person, and individual to try to understand and recognize the crucial role of personal experience in constructive theology. In this book I employ the traditional language and add terms like individuated experience to indicate that my experience that feels bounded in my person affects and is affected at all times by contexts and stories that also exceed my person. Stories help make sense of an increasingly diverse world of more information, more conflicts, and more desire for certainty in a context of uncertainty, ambiguity, and intercultural complexity. Narrative methods have made important contributions across fields of study from narrative medicine to narrative theology to narrative counseling. 8 Telling and hearing more stories in more ways becomes important to pastoral theology and care that attends suffering and participates in healing. Risks of Speaking, Writing, or Voicing in Postcolonial Contexts The stories of intercultural misunderstandings that form the ethnographic context of this book are postcolonial stories. What is theological about studying, writing, and reading about postcolonialism? Pastoral theology is a theological discipline whose task is to attend to suffering and to participate in healing. Postcolonialism as a condition of contemporary reality is a recognition of the inherent suffering that continues as a legacy of historical colonialism. Misunderstanding across cultural differences is almost inevitable because of the colonial assumptions so deeply embedded in individuated persons and communities. Postcolonial narratives are important resources for constructive pastoral theology because they expose the depth of complicity that challenges the empowerment, liberation, and resistance that the field of pastoral theology has claimed as the guiding paradigms of care in a postmodern world. Simply, pastoral practices that attend suffering and participate in healing are more theologically responsible when they recognize the legacy of colonialism active in our lives, relationships, and the whole world. The only way to do this is by becoming open to postcolonial questions, best grasped through postcolonial stories. Postcolonial theories also compel academics to consider new ways of studying, reading, and writing. 9 Responsible academic practices must include grappling with how to live in the tension between wanting to recognize and not wanting to recognize complicities. Iris Marion Young suggests practicing resistance in a context of oppressive structural hierarchies by focusing on embodiment and actual bodies. 10 In The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World, Elaine Scarry provides a complex view of the phenomenon of embodied pain. Pain destroys bodies and embodied expression of pain experiences through language. The way we tell and hear and read and write stories contributes to making ourselves and other individuated persons visible or invisible. 11 New questions inform studying, reading, and writing: who is seen and who is rendered invisible in what I read, how I write, and my methods of study? What’s at stake? Pastoral theologians have embraced models of care as empowerment, liberation, and resistance because these activities help to make pain visible, and other people visible to each other so that our many embodied wounds, and our wounded relationships and world, can experience healing. Scarry argues that the survival of the world depends on continual re-creating in response to continual destruction of bodies. The world is at risk of ultimate destruction; therefore, attempts must be made to counter this destruction. Scarry assumes that language can be shared. Recognizing that I cause pain without feeling it as such by objectifying it, Scarry implies a shared question of experience that we could phrase as, how can I be? Her ethical insights follow from this existential exploration, and attempt to address a second implied question, how can I be wrong? 12 As one theological educator recently asked, to what extent do we “embrace the challenge of really not knowing” that requires courage and humility? 13 Pastoral theology’s embrace of empowerment, liberation, and resistance as goals of pastoral care needs to be wide enough to question how you and I participate in disempowerment, imprisonment, and dehumanization. Postcolonial questions help pastoral theologians better attend suffering and better participate in healing by the constant reminder that I have something(s) to learn. In other words, we need to ask within the goals and methods of care: “how can I be wrong?” and “how am I contributing to harm?” when I think I am participating in healing. The language of provisional understanding is more adequate than the idea that I can and do ever reach some sort of perfect understanding of myself or others. This requires making oneself vulnerable to misunderstanding, as the best intentions can be not only wrong but also harmful toward myself and my neighbor. Pastoral theology has come a long way toward a more liberative perspective; however, I am trying to ground this perspective in a foundation with room for questions and misunderstanding. A robust appeal to self-reflective experience recognizes that all of us can be wrong even at the very beginning where misunderstandings originate. Therefore, we must engage in a narrative process that makes room for misunderstanding stories. This book explores postcolonial stories of intercultural misunderstanding in order to equip pastoral theologians with tools for asking and living in the ambiguous big questions that lead to renewed possibilities for understanding. Engaging the narrative process and particular narratives—both the postcolonial stories I tell and the stories evoked for you in reading this text—includes asking questions about being and being in community. This book argues that being engaged in a process of understanding includes misunderstanding stories. Audiences and Sources I write this book as a new model of a postcolonial story that also contains other postcolonial stories within it. As the subtitle suggests, this book advances the intercultural paradigm within the field of pastoral theology by arguing that as a field, we need to move toward a postcolonial pastoral theology. While indeed moving, the field has not reached a shared postcolonial understanding. This book contributes to the intercultural paradigm precisely by inviting conversations within and beyond the field of pastoral theology toward a deeper consideration of postcolonialism. A truly postcolonial project cannot be single authored because of the conversational model postcolonialism requires (i.e., I have to ask you how I can be wrong and then listen to your response and vice versa ). However, single-authored books have always helped fields of study open new questions and deepen intellectual commitments. Individuated experiences shared through individuated stories contribute to understanding and misunderstanding of personal, communal, and global needs and resources. I hope that leaders in faith communities and seminary students will read this book to help understand the complexity of pastoral care and theology in a postcolonial context. It is enough of a lifelong challenge to give an account of oneself, much less an account of one’s participation or role in intercultural relationships. Therefore, consider each chapter as an invitation for you to examine your own experiences of misunderstanding and understanding. For example, chapter 1 presents a model and example of the kind of ethnographic work that enhances contextual understanding. Consider this chapter inspiration for your own investment in ethnographic work in your present and future communities. In chapters 2 through 5, consider my analysis of unique intercultural experiences as an invitation for you to cultivate and critically reflect on your unique intercultural experiences. Chapter 6 serves not only as a conclusion to the book, but also as a summary of the book’s unique contributions to the field of pastoral theology. Stories from my intercultural experiences hold a central place in the book. I supplement the standard methodological conversation in pastoral theology between theology and psychology with insights from postcolonial theories. Each chapter embodies strategic interdisciplinary partnerships that nuance dynamics of misunderstandings for the purposes of opening and participating in possibilities for more mutual understanding. Pastoral theology is a field of study open to conversation partners to help understand the suffering of the human condition and what it means to participate in the healing work of empowering, liberating, and resisting, which supplement and build on previously theorized pastoral functions of healing, guiding, sustaining, reconciling, and nurturing individuated persons and communities. The vocation implied by these pastoral tasks requires the depth of understanding described in this book. A Guide to Engaging This Book The book offers an accessible, relevant, and complex way of considering understanding as a process. Like all stories, the stories of intercultural misunderstanding that frame and appear in narrative fragments throughout the book occurred in a particular context and point in time. Therefore, chapter 1 explains the anthropological concept of ethnography and provides a mini-ethnography of Suriname, South America, the host country of my Peace Corps service and site of inspiration for this study. The rest of the book outlines the difficult process of understanding that, in the best cases, is ignited and deeply engaged by individuated persons and communities when discrete and challenging experiences of intercultural misunderstanding occur. The project of engaging understanding as a process around the particular set of complex intercultural stories mentioned in this book is a lifelong process of participating in truthful telling, retelling, hearing, and rehearing stories from as many voices as possible. Chapters 2 through 5 employ and critically engage an anthropological framework that moves from breach to crisis to redress to reconciliation for understanding the movements or tensions that intercultural relationships negotiate. Chapter 2 (Breach) gives a more elaborate description of one challenging story of intercultural misunderstanding mentioned above. The first step in engaging a process of understanding is to recognize the sharp lapses in communication that often surround misunderstandings. I draw on anthropological and political theorists to claim that pastoral theology needs a more complex conception of culture(s) to evaluate the complicated intercultural contexts in which our many forms of communication are located. Intercultural caregiving practices are enhanced when we envision cultures as constantly changing, internally diverse, internally contested, and ambiguous yet powerful contributors to interpersonal and intercommunal misunderstandings. I adapt a model of cultural conflict from anthropologist Victor Turner as a way of framing narrative structures around postcolonial stories that originate in a lapse in understanding and require a carefully storied communal response. Chapter 3 (Crisis) describes crises of identity that accompany intercultural misunderstandings. I partner a classical understanding of identity crisis with a postcolonial claim that colonialism has institutionalized identity crisis in dehumanizing ways. Postcolonial theories reorient how participants in care attend to suffering by helping us realize some of the ways in which we participate in violence in even well-meaning and thoughtful attempts to engage the thickly intercultural nature of the contemporary church and world. Such recognition opens significant spaces for both lament and creative potential for renewed understanding. Chapter 4 (Redress as Movement toward Resolution) describes the kind of shared vulnerability required to ask and live in the high-stakes ambiguous questions that intercultural misunderstandings provoke. Psychological theorists have long claimed a connection between (wounded) desire and domination that has fueled interpersonal and communal violence; systematic and pastoral theologians often draw on these psychological theories to help construct appropriate responses and practices. This chapter partners theological and psychological perspectives to understand and disrupt historical moments of deep misunderstanding as well as our own participation in and, in some cases, desire for misunderstanding that gets in the way of the vulnerability required for asking and living in challenging questions that identity crises evoke. I argue that shared vulnerability is a condition of opening up possibilities of recognition. Chapter 5 (Conditions for Reconciliation) describes ways in which my intercultural misunderstanding in MoiKonde became open to new possibilities of understanding through a process of intercultural empathy. Empathy in this sense is a process of deeper recognition. I partner a traditional understanding of empathy with a postcolonial claim that the violence of colonialism makes intercultural empathy incredibly difficult. Serious consideration of intercultural relationships can redefine empathy. Here is another reason that we need to engage postcolonial theories. Concrete experiences of intercultural crisis call for theories of empathy that recognize the many intercultural misunderstandings and histories of violence that provide the context for occasional moments of intercultural understanding. Chapter 6 concludes with implications of taking misunderstanding stories seriously as the most prevalent and most often masked narrative context of the attentive and participatory work of pastoral theology and care. Intercultural understanding is a process that deepens pastoral theological theories of mutuality by widening our sense of possibilities regarding occasions in which we can better participate in interpersonal and intercultural justice which affirms God’s love and regard for all human beings. A deep pastoral theological engagement with postcolonialism involves nurturing practices of living communally and interculturally in the midst of complex tensions and difficult questions. I propose that pastoral theologians continue to nurture practices that will hold together an optimistic hope for a realized mutuality while expressing a realistic grief that reminds us of the sheer difficulty of experiencing mutual intercultural understanding. Pastoral theologians know something about holding together hoping and grieving, celebration and lamentation, human fulfillment and human brokenness in a way that draws diverse participants together in a community that strives toward healing and wholeness while taking care not to minimize real challenges and differences in our midst. 1. Chambers, Whose Reality Counts? 2. In phenomenological terms, the horizon of possibilities of understanding is already populated with histories of violence. 3. See Doehring, The Practice of Pastoral Care, for a good description of authoritative sources for the work of pastoral theology in a postmodern world. 4. Tracy, The Analogical Imagination. 5. Aleshire, Earthen Vessels, 15. 6. Ibid., 29. 7. See Ramsay, Pastoral Care and Counseling; Lartey, In Living Color; and Lartey, Pastoral Theology in an Intercultural World. 8. For example, see Montello, “Narrative Matters”; Zaner, Conversations on the Edge; Neuger, Counseling Women; Lester, Hope in Pastoral Care and Counseling. 9. Good et al., “Postcolonial Disorders,” 4. 10. Young, “Lived Body versus Gender,” 3 – 18. 11. Scarry, The Body in Pain, 22. 12. Gay, “Syllabus on Methods.” 13. Yoder, “Two Associate Professors Reflect on Their Journeys.”