Appendix Journal Prompts and Discussion Questions T heologians and ministers and ethicists are question bearers, invitation issuers, first responders in crisis, wonder beholders, and we can therefore embody steadfastness in our openness to questions, while at the same time recognizing the possibility for questions to destabilize the kinds of moral certainties often requested of us. The following list of questions in relation to each of the chapters could structure journal writing, online or classroom discussions, free writing exercises, or serve as bridges between personal reflection and public conversation. Introduction What “big questions” have opened for you in theological education and life experience? How do you invest in ethnographic work in your present community? How might you attend to ethnography more intentionally in your present and future communities? As you critically reflect on your unique intercultural experiences, what understanding and misunderstanding stories come to mind? Where do you find your soul clapping for others? Where are the silences within your soul? How can your local faith community begin to confront its own participation in colonialism? When has your world both come together and apart all at the same time? Before engaging the thoughts found in this book, did you think it was possible to arrive in the land of “understanding” in relationship before first hiking through the thick complexity of misunderstanding? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 1 What is your first response to the questions: Who am I? Who are we? How do you understand yourself as one who participates in relationships with other people? What kinds of relationships do you participate in simultaneously? What is your cultural identity? How does culture(s) affect your relationships? Was this included in your first response to naming your identity? How does(/do) culture(s) both separate and enrich cross-generational relationships within your family(ies)? How do your relationships fit into your experiences and beliefs about the larger world in which we live? Can you name some things that have prohibited your process of meaning-making? How do you understand a “good enough” relationship? What makes for a relationship that is not good enough? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 2 When have you recovered a healthy relationship after a breach in understanding? What strategies of understanding seemed to work? What intensified the misunderstanding? What spaces do you find to be the most creative? What spaces do you find to be the most destructive? How have experiences of conflict related in each case? Suppose you were to tell the story of a momentous life occasion. Outline how you might narrate this story from multiple perspectives within and outside of yourself. Repeat this exercise by narrating a momentous story from the life of your church or faith community. What multiple voices emerge? What or who is missing? What is postcolonial about these stories? Where do you experience conflicting moral commitments or values? What strategies have you found to encourage conversation across multiple competing perspectives? Can you imagine additional strategies? What was stressed and what was missing from your history lessons as a child? What do you see emphasized and missing in learning histories today in contexts of school, faith communities, family, and other contexts? Who have you been guilty of gazing beyond? Why are we so resistant to “overhearing voices so long unheard”? Have you ever been faced with an experience of “surrender”? What was the “catch” for you? Consider this quotation from Paulo Freire: “to wash our hands of the struggle between the powerful and the powerless is not to be neutral but to side with the powerful.” How has your faith community sided with the powerful? How have you personally done so? What stories do you have a hunch need unearthing in your life and local context? What informs this hunch? How do you understand an unearthing process that respects multiple voices and perspectives? What kind of risks do you associate with processes of unearthing? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 3 How would you begin to describe the story of your soul? What do you think of the idea of having more than one soul or of considering multiplicity within your soul? How would you characterize the trajectory of your identity formation? What significant times of transition can you identify? What experiences, rituals, struggles, or emotions do you associate with your life transitions? What norms and values undergird these rites of passage? Can you name some Biblical characters that seemed to be struggling with crises of identity? How do you prepare yourself and the communities in which you participate to recognize complicity in misunderstanding? Can you imagine locating this conversation around themes, such as food, economics, hospitality, education, mission? Can you imagine expanding rites of confession as sites for naming complicity? What other spaces can spark conversations about complicity? How can you and your faith community confront complicity while simultaneously maintain a spirit of hope? How would you define “successful” development? Can you think of counter examples to this model of success? Where does this model dehumanize and where does it invite possibilities for diverse ways of being successful? Is success the right word here? What other words can you imagine? How are your ideas about human development shaped by gender, race, age, religious experience, and nationality? How are children and elders welcomed into robust community in your school, faith community, family, and community? Do you recognize Imago Dei (the image of God) in all human beings in your midst? Where are you caught by surprise? How can you participate in leadership (in faith communities, in the academy, in other public contexts) responsibly? What risks can you take in writing? Where do you need courage in speaking your voice? How can we claim universal models of human experience or, by extension, universal human rights without dehumanizing or silencing other human beings? What comes to mind when you imagine participating in a mutual relationship? What are the characteristics of that relationship? Why are some of those characteristics absent in other relationships? Do you think of your relationship with God as mutual? Why or why not? Walk around the building, website, and printed materials in your school, home, and faith community. What kinds of images signify mission or service opportunities? How are human beings represented? Where are images dehumanizing? What images are affirming of human dignity? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 4 If you were to imagine your gaze as a pair of glasses, what do yours look like? Where are your blind spots? Where is your vision sharpest? Have you ever considered yourself as “caught in a sticky web of privilege”? Vulnerability can open us to harm and disconnection as well as to healing and connection. How do you understand the ethics of vulnerability? How do you participate in creating space for sharing in vulnerability? When is it more difficult and when is it more likely for you to be vulnerable? In the midst of crisis or in response to another’s crisis, what kind of questions do you find yourself asking? What questions get in the way of and what questions help you be present? How do you identify your privilege in terms of the social power you have that you can attribute to identity markers such as gender, race, sexuality, age, nationality, etc.? In your life experiences, what is the role of privilege in places where you could name your desire for understanding as wounded? What kinds of emotions does this reflection raise for you? How are you accountable for your privilege? How is woundedness shared in your school, faith community, family? Where do you see healing and relief of suffering taking place? Do you feel connected to a global process of healing and relief of suffering in these places? Where are you most comfortable with silence? Where are you least comfortable with silence? When is your silence complicity and when does it make room for other voices? When have you found silence to be wounding? When have you experienced silence as “opening new ways of listening, discerning, hearing, and practicing”? When life calls you into a vulnerable space that is difficult to endure, are you most likely to default to despair or self-righteousness? Where in your life are you a single author and where are you a co-author? Where do you see new opportunities for coauthoring? Engage this question theologically through concepts such as call, divine presence, steadfast love, or others that occur to you. Who is your neighbor? Is anyone not your neighbor? Why or why not? When have you experienced assent to your person? When have you shared most fully in mutuality with others? What has facilitated and sustained this experience? What has disrupted or prevented it? What practices in your school, faith community, family, and local community facilitate assenting to the person of your neighbor? Can you imagine new practices or prayers of assent? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 5 Where do you yearn for a more hopeful future? Where do you see needs for reconciliation in your person, school, faith community, family, community, world? What signals this need? What kind of interpersonal affirmation do you think could work toward reconciliation? Can you point to ways in which these hopes and needs are embodied? Where have you seen hopeful reconciliation? Do you think that reconciliation is ever finished? Why or why not? What misunderstanding stories are you caught up in at home, abroad, and all in between? Can you identity optimal failures and frustrations? How might these facilitate potential space for creativity and movement toward understanding? In what ways are you currently living in “a state of tension between wounding and healing”? Where are you overconfident in your claim of understanding in your own experiences, experiences of other human beings, or larger communities? Where are you too timid? How do you find potential space, strategies, and support for being good enough? Do the diagrams in this chapter open new understanding to you? Can you imagine mapping Scripture or other sacred texts, community dynamics, religious rituals and sacraments onto the diagrams? Can you image other ways of depicting movement from disconnection to connection? Where do you need to risk more proximal relationships with neighbors we claim not to understand but with whom we have no face-to-face experience? Where do you see God working in connected processes of recognition, empathy, and reconciliation? Is pastoral theology in particular and Christianity in general oriented toward an optimistic stance that aims to reduce disruptions and discomforts of suffering? Can you name a time when your faith community was forced to navigate an experience of “optimal frustration”? How did you grow through the experience? In what ways did the experience create greater understanding because of attending to the original misunderstanding? When have you experienced assent to your whole being? When have you shared most fully in mutuality with others? What has facilitated and sustained this experience? What has disrupted or prevented it? What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why? Chapter 6 What misunderstanding stories have you experienced at home, abroad, and in the connections and disconnections between the local and global? How do you tell, retell, hear, and overhear narrative fragments of these stories? Which questions listed in the chapter stand out to you and grab your attention? What is your response? Which questions feel less relevant to you? Why? As you read through the web of tensions, what dynamics do you experience to be most prominent in your lived experiences? Do you feel a nudge to unearth any new attention to tensions? Which tensions are you resisting in this list or desire to collapse into a dualism? What other tensions can you imagine? How do your care practices affirm recognition and help facilitate mutual understanding? Where are your growing edges? Craft a prayer or fragment of a prayer for mutual understanding. What one sentence or question from this section of the book do you find most moving, challenging, disturbing, thought provoking, agitating, or otherwise engaging? Why?