4 Sharing in Vulnerability T elling and retelling, hearing and overhearing misunderstanding stories will help to open pathways for deeper and more mutual understanding. Receiving and offering misunderstanding stories requires courage and acknowledgement of being misguided in assumptions and conclusions. This kind of acknowledgement requires a disciplined desire for understanding. Theologians and philosophers have argued for centuries that human desire is distorted and requires discipline. Saying, thinking, or writing that I want to reach points of mutual understanding in relationships is one thing. Experiencing humility and acknowledging my contributions to misunderstanding are much more difficult to sustain because these practices require vulnerability. A willingness to be vulnerable to learning in direct relation to neighbors across cultural and other differences depends on the kind of recognition theorized in chapter 3. This chapter engages the sharing in vulnerability that accompanies recognition. Drawing on feminist insights from psychology and theology through Jessica Benjamin’s psychological concept of intersubjectivity and Wendy Farley’s theological notion of distorted desire, I argue for engaging a discipline of accountability that respects the complexity of embodied desire in relation to understanding oneself and other people, particularly in those moments when misunderstandings and violations wound bodies, relationships, and communities. That desire is wounded in a postcolonial context is a guiding assumption and starting point of this chapter. We can imagine a spectrum of responses to the difficult task of attending to oppression and injustice in contemporary forms of pastoral and religious care, ranging from the desire not to know to the desire for idealistic change to the desire to recognize complicity and responsibility. Paradoxes of privilege make this task more complicated and difficult. The goal of this chapter is to invite religious reflection and moral imagination around cultivating a desire for learning that can activate movement toward new possibilities of sharing in vulnerability and subsequently more mutual understanding. More mutual understanding is needed in relation to matters of justice that are (and are made to be) invisible right in our midst in churches, hospitals, other local institutions, and local communities, and far beyond the scope of our habitual gazing. Looking at others through dehumanizing representations rather than recognizing others as sharing in humanity is important with respect to our neighbors both close to home and often far beyond the purview of our daily life. We need courageous self-reflection to address our complicity in strategies of dehumanization that endure as a legacy of historical colonialism. When we consider practices of justice and practices of exclusion or injustice, we must account for the complex interaction of the personal, familial, communal, local, intercultural, national, and international relationships and structural systems. In relation to attending suffering and facilitating healing, pastoral theology and care practices oriented toward expansive goals of liberation, empowerment, and resistance include, first, a sense of shared vulnerability. Overemphasis on an individualistic mindset has shielded us from being vulnerable to each other, particularly when we encounter interpersonal and intercultural differences. Second, justice-oriented theology and care practices also involve responsibility. We feel responsible to those with whom we are in relationship. With no perception of a relationship, or a relationship where one partner is devalued, comes the feeling that there is no claim on me or my commitments toward another human being. Without relationship, we lose a sense of responsibility to the other. 1 Third, justice-oriented care calls for “ authentic participation. ” 2 I participate authentically when I recognize my participation in a breach in understanding and I recognize the need to participate in conditions for resolution. The following narrative fragment exemplifies that shared vulnerability, responsibility, and authentic participation are deeply interrelated. A Narrative Fragment In our absence, my life partner and I learned through a New Year’s Day phone call with a friend in the village that a break-in of our home in MoiKonde had occurred. We were disappointed but at the same time strangely and uncomfortably understanding. Simultaneously shocked and unsurprised. The reason we were not surprised was not because of any ill-formed opinion of the character of the children who broke the wooden window and explored our home while we were away, ironically leaving food storage containers opened but otherwise undisturbed and only stealing the holiday treats we left for them to be given by a neighbor who had a key to the house. We respected and adored our neighbors and their children. In one sense, we were not surprised to hear of the break-in because our home was in many ways a communal space for being in community with children. Their artwork adorned the walls. They ate and drank and played in the space as much as we did. It was our home in a robust communal sense. At the same time, we were disappointed out of a strong sense of personal property; we locked the house while we left and assumed that our neighbors—these same children and their families—would watch over it for us. Experiences of ambiguity and a range of emotions accompanied and followed that telephone call on New Year’s morning. We desired communication and reconciliation. We were confident that we knew what a process for reconciliation could and should look like. We strategized about how to implement our plan in an interculturally sensitive and respectful way that honored our disappointment while also making space for healing. We prepared to return to MoiKonde to resume and complete our service with a clear plan ready to offer to our neighbors. We resolved crisis of identity by appealing to this confident clarity with a renewed commitment to our roles as Peace Corps volunteers invested in the challenges and possibilities of intercultural understanding through friendship. This all quickly dissolved once we returned into the experience of living in (and not just thinking about) the challenges of intercultural partnering. Only later after returning to the village did we learn that the break-in had already been addressed internally via communal beatings of the girls. We could only begin to piece together a picture of whatever had resulted in bruised faces of our closest young neighbors. We had never witnessed this kind of communal beating, though we were all too aware of the daily physical violence to children, animals, women, and occasionally men in our midst. The larger insider community seemed to have placed shame on the families of the girls. As with most village houses, the front part of our house was a public space, especially, in our experience, to welcome children. Though our neighbors—the girls and their families—had been frequent visitors to our home throughout each and every day, all relationships between us and the girls’ families (our neighbors and close friends) were severed in a way we experienced but did not understand. The girls and their siblings were now banned from entering our house. We were initially unaware of the internal response of the village. Once we returned to MoiKonde, evidence of communally sanctioned physical violence toward children from visible scarring and verbal reporting prompted our return to crises-of-identity, questions about human nature and conflicting norms of human interaction. We realized that we held a robust vision of reconciliation: accountability and apology based on a model of restorative justice, which we envisioned would naturally provide a mechanism for recovering relationships by restoring a sense of health and vitality. Differing norms of communication thwarted our efforts toward restorative justice through face-to-face encounters with any of the girls or their families, sending us back to crises of identity and an extended experience of misunderstanding. When I had unintentionally violated the sacred trust of MaLespeki some months earlier, we were able to resolve the breach by communicating with her daughter, another respected matriarch in MoiKonde. However, in this case of returning to severed relationships, no one conversation seemed to hold any reconciliatory potential. Rather, each conversation added layers of complexity to intercultural misunderstanding around a process of reconciliation. Narrative fragments swirled around and within us in the long weeks of being suspended in crisis about how to restore meaningful intercultural relationships. We heard a story about children who simply entered the house through an open window, which is culturally acceptable, therefore restoring relationships. At the same time, we overheard a story about how children who steal will escalate in violence over time, so therefore there can be no restoration because of this inevitable slippery slope. We heard and overheard stories that we deserved the break-in for being white, for living well in the village, for being American, for leaving, for coming back. We heard that we were on the agenda for the annual yali kuutu, the New Year’s community-wide meeting. Captain began the yali kuutu by unearthing the narrative of MoiKonde from Africa to the colonies to the rainforest and most recently to forced relocation after the human-made lake had flooded their previous land. All items on the agenda were framed by their place in a much longer and much more complex historical narrative in which this community endured oppression and broken promises from those in power. Even though we had previously met with village elders and Peace Corps administrators to voice our commitment to return to MoiKonde after the break-in, this time we were asked to make an account of our commitment and of our understanding of our role in relation to the cultural history of MoiKonde in front of the whole community. We reiterated our disappointment in the news of the break-in, along with our desire and commitment for restoring relationships with those in MoiKonde, who had welcomed us, and for whom we were grateful. We restated our desire to learn to live well even in the face of misunderstandings and cross-cultural mistakes and poor choices from all parties. We exchanged traditional forms of mutual recognition through phrases, applause, traditional handshakes, and embraces. The yali kuutu went on for another several hours, attending to the other important discussion items of the year. This formal event did not resolve the breach; however, it opened a pathway for possibilities of resolution. The journal entry where we first reflected on the experience of the yali kuutu is titled “the day life may have started turning around.” Vulnerable to Questions? Beginning to negotiate a vision of reconciliation within experiences of misunderstandings—what Victor Turner calls “redress”—is often a shared, communal, public event. At the same time, negotiations toward healing after a crisis event also necessarily occur, at least initially, in a limited and privileged space among persons who share particular understandings of social structures. Persons often begin to address conflict internally within communities of support. Eventually, reconciliatory activity can be hosted in institutions oriented toward response and resolution. However, the drive to address conflict in public is often in tension with the drive to hold conflict tightly within an inner circle with little public attention. 3 The predictable tension wears on relationships and communities. Telling and retelling misunderstanding stories even and especially within moments of heightened stress and palpable tension requires sharing in vulnerability. This is complicated because experiences of splitting that are felt within relationships are part of an intercultural ritual process. Turner considered the redress phase a sometimes theatrical, public forum that addresses social behavior. 4 While I find Turner’s idea of redress helpful, the term “redress” is problematic. To redress assumes knowledge about how a particular transgression needs to be made right. In the aftermath of crises of understanding, part of the challenge is figuring out what happened, what is going on now, and how to reimagine the future. Rather than knowing the ins and outs of a crisis and how it needs to be addressed, these factors are unknowns and must be found in careful attention and learning. In the early aftermath of heightened crisis, sharing in vulnerability around questions of events and their meanings is to address in the spirit of restoration rather than to redress according to a particular pre-understanding. Communal values, norms, and rules find expression through ritualized social responses. Remember the example of the formal courtroom ritual that promises to redress breaches in a United States context. In the above narrative fragment, the yali kuutu provided space for public attention to resolving the layers of intercultural breaches we were experiencing. Relational stress along cultural, subcultural, familial, gendered, racialized, and other seemingly distinct lines can also lead to exclusive or private ritualistic pathways to resolution. We must remember that one family often activates resolution such that persons outside of the family not only do not participate but also might not even be aware of the familial process. At the same time, this familial process affects and is deeply connected to social relationships that exist well beyond members of this particular family. An initial communal response to any crisis of understanding is only a beginning. Both experiences of crisis and efforts toward resolution focus attention on various fault lines in relational matrixes. This phenomenon is amplified in relation to cultural differences. In the experience described above, my plan for reconciliation came into sharp conflict with a model of reconciliation that I did not understand. I can guess that cultural difference is a factor at play; however, the only thing I know with certainty in the face of conflict is that I don’t know or understand all of the factors at play. Nor does anyone else. Therefore, in the face of tension and stress on relationships, persons must be intentionally focused and disciplined in listening and speaking. One must become vulnerable to questions: What am I missing? What am I misunderstanding? What is being shared? What am I sharing? What am I withholding? What do I need to learn? Where do I need to hear and overhear? Where do I need to tell and retell? If asking these kinds of self-reflective questions under pressure were easy, then there would be a lot less suffering in the world. Careful attention to oneself and to others is more difficult under pressure than when everything is or seems to be going well. We can all think of examples from our individualized experience. Phyllis Tickle also highlights this phenomenon on a systemic level: when the whole church in all its wonderful diversity is under pressure around declining membership in the midst of worldwide economic crisis, human beings tend to retreat into the simplest yet most extreme position regarding any particular issue. 5 Predictably, in times of stress, it is more difficult to speak clearly and more difficult to listen and to hear anything that anyone is saying. No wonder misunderstanding stories are so difficult to tell and retell, to hear and overhear! Human beings simply do not desire vulnerability in the precise moments that they experience destabilization of a sense of self and communal identity. When what normally feels stable suddenly feels unstable, we tend to desire some stability rather than to identify the string of connected uncertainties now in our awareness. Shifting in identity always involves loss; we must engage practices of discipline in order to differentiate between, on the one hand, the loss that comes with participating in courageous change; and, on the other hand, forced experiences of loss that result from an abusive misuse of power. In the context of courageous change, intercultural sharing in uncertainties can lead to greater depth of understanding precisely when so much is at stake if and when we are willing to unmask power differentials and invite a multiplicity of voices and opinions. Recognition of human beings beyond habits of gazing structured by dehumanizing representations opens us to shared vulnerability. An other human being is seen no longer as representing a category or as less than, but rather as a potential partner fundamentally sharing in humanity. We recognize that sharing in questions means sharing in a desire to acknowledge misunderstanding in the service of a deeper, more mutual understanding. Possibilities for Healing the Woundedness of Postcolonial Desire and the Paradox of Privilege Embodied learning affects one’s sense of self and sense of community and is therefore challenging and often disruptive. Learning to attend to oppression within practices and visions of pastoral care is particularly disruptive and can evoke that tricky trio: fight, flight, or freeze. Fighting often takes the form of resistance to recognizing complicity in the privilege afforded through complicity in strategic dehumanization of other human beings. Defensive speech and body language can provoke others to join in the fight. Some show little emotion. Others rage. The desire not to know both facilitates and impedes openness to learning as movement toward new possibilities of understanding. Another common response is flight, which can happen by envisioning an idealistic beyond to white privilege, which we might actually reach in the near future. Some of us shed tears. Others ask, how long? as if realizing the gravity of this question for the first time. Recognizing the depth of suffering in local and global communities issues a call to wrestle with the theological concept of hope. The desire for change both facilitates and impedes openness to learning as movement toward new possibilities of understanding. Still other students freeze: they see their complicity in a new way and become stuck in despair. Eyes widen. The desire to recognize complicity, vulnerability, and responsibility both facilitates and impedes openness to learning as movement toward new possibilities of understanding. Each response contributes to important conversations in the pastoral theology classroom. Many experience all of these responses at one time or another. Whatever our response, all of us are entangled in sticky webs of privilege. What resources can help us understand and offer hospitality to these complex desires for the sake of justice in a world of inequality and systemic dehumanization? Acknowledging this as a valid question for my consideration is being vulnerable to it. The question requires recognizing that strategic, systemic dehumanization supports a world of inequality and oppression—and our complicity in them. In addition, we must recognize the challenges of how this postcolonial legacy characterizes the context for contemporary pastoral theologies and care practices. Recent shifts in the field from individualistic, caregiver-centered care to a more expansive view of care as communal, intercultural, and participatory foster contextual understanding. The important work of theorizing this expansive move must, like the best of pastoral theologies, give an account of its embodiment in practices in lived experience. Honing practices of telling, retelling, hearing, and overhearing misunderstanding stories is a way of considering lived experience as the field moves in more liberative directions. Misunderstanding stories underscore the need to understand that desire is wounded in our postcolonial context. Day after day in MoiKonde that January, we lived with failures of reconciliation found in intercultural misunderstanding that we embodied but did not understand. At our best, our openness to learning included both a willingness to understand and a willingness to recognize misunderstanding. Yet, we resisted the desire to learn during these weeks as well, even finding pleasure in the feeling of certainly being right. Desire for discerning both that I need to learn and what I have misunderstood is difficult to maintain, particularly in relation to the stress of intercultural breach in understanding. In the weeks after returning to MoiKonde, the experience of engaging in the long process oriented toward these dual goals of yearning for understanding required the difficult disciplined work of remaining vulnerable to recognizing misunderstanding. We resisted, we argued, we cried, we flew off into idealistic views of intercultural harmony, we disengaged, we got angry, we stared into space, we reengaged, we encountered our emotions, we journaled, we sat with neighbors in silence, we yearned to sit with neighbors. We experienced both the distortions of desire for resolution and a strong desire for sharing in the long process toward reconciliation. Lived experience, with all its emotional, moral, psychological, and other complexities reveals the importance of pastoral theologies and care practices that attend to suffering while desiring to limit harm as much as possible and staying open to recognizing unintentional violations through communal investment and interaction. This work is even more complicated when we recognize connections between desire and domination that continue to fuel interpersonal and communal violence. In the next sections, I engage an interdisciplinary study of feminist psychoanalytic and theological perspectives on complex desires and subsequent complexity of vulnerability in our postcolonial contexts. Intersubjective Desire and Misunderstanding Stories Pastoral theologians appeal to depth psychology to help us understand the challenge of mutual understanding, particularly with respect to differences. Tension is important in many depth psychologies in relation to processes oriented toward understanding within and between human beings. Further, tension is central to Victor Turner’s relational anthropology and to sociologist Kurt Wolff’s conception of the serious play of vulnerabilities oriented toward practices of cognitive love reviewed in chapter 2. In chapter 3, I outlined the role of identity crises in opening space both for recognizing the personhood of other human beings and also for recognizing my complicity in practices of non-recognition. While I constantly negotiate this tension, it also creates space for mutual sharing in vulnerability. Feminist psychoanalyst Jessica Benjamin also places tension at the core of healthy relational life. Her influential book Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination ( 1988 ) continues to be a significant resource in pastoral theology and gender studies classrooms. Benjamin’s understanding of intersubjective desire is a way to better understand the vulnerability that can open to conditions for resolution within experiences of intercultural misunderstanding. Like other psychoanalysts, Benjamin theorizes by first appealing to the analogy of the infant-mother relationship. However, Benjamin criticizes post-Freudians like Margaret Mahler who theorize separation and individuation as the ultimate and most desirable goals of child development. 6 This is significant because, according to Benjamin, two human beings exist as subjects any time a baby is born of a mother. 7 Rather than one-way development, Benjamin envisions a “continual, dynamic, evolving balance” to recognize subjectivity across all parties in relationships. 8 She theorizes about an intersubjective relationality in which human beings interact with parents and other authority figures in patterns of separation (establishing a sense of identity set apart from other human beings) and attachment (establishing a sense of identity connected to other human beings). For Benjamin, growing in relationship requires navigating this as one of many tensions. Coming to terms with interpersonal differences through mutual recognition is a much more adequate conception of relational life than what she considers to be the false premise of parental authority as that from which the infant must strive to separate. 9 Recall that we also learn with Nandy’s postcolonial psychology in chapter 3 how dangerous it is to use a parent-child model to hypothesize about international relations and social development on the level of communities. Nandy criticizes the analogy from personal development to national development because he sees the risk of infantilizing and feminizing developing nations based on a so-called gold standard of the developed world. Nandy implores us to see how this flawed vision is operative in our own imaginations. It is flawed because it prevents mutual understanding by employing a colonizing gaze and therefore perpetuating dehumanizing representations rather than supporting opportunities for mutual recognition. Both Nandy and Benjamin theorize that gender is a central factor in how relationships play out in social contexts. While The Bonds of Love tends to view gender in a United States context—for instance, Benjamin considers the inadequate resources for affordable daycare given United States laws and social norms 10 —examples of the weight of parenting responsibilities that structurally fall on women are certainly relevant beyond the internal contextual diversity of the United States. Benjamin criticizes the dualisms of Western culture particularly around gender polarity as the structure that supported traditional patterns of male domination and that continues to structure the present day. Like Nandy, Benjamin exposes the dangers of choosing to identify with one “pole” of identity by participating in strategies that dehumanize any part of oneself or other human beings who “choose” to identify with the opposite “pole” of identity. We see this dynamic in dualistic language, such as American and un-American, Christian and non-Christian, churched and un-churched, and so on. As outlined in chapter 3, this kind of bipolarity sets up false dichotomies around race, gender, and age, as well as nationality, religious affiliation, and other identity markers. Gender polarity now supports more subtle patterns of domination that work via the myth that identity is a matter of rigid choice rather than honoring the complex multiplicity of identity. 11 A model of intersubjective relationality serves as an alternative to a flawed model of individuality supported by dualistic thinking that diminishes the humanity of anyone who identifies with the opposite or negation of me. In contrast, an intersubjective model considers that human beings play an active part struggling toward a more integrated process of creatively discovering and accepting the ambiguity of his or her context. 12 Intersubjectivity aims to unmask traditional patterns of domination that regulate relationships, particularly around gender differences but also around cultural differences, according to a model of a recognizable “master” who requires submission and non-recognition. Submission in this model becomes pleasurable for those who submit to the system as commanded by the one who embodies the so-called master role. Other theorists take up what Benjamin calls submission in terms of silence, 13 harmful adaptation, 14 tolerance of inauthentically received identity, 15 or conformity. 16 The myth that this “crushing objectification,” maintained through these and other distorted adaptations is pleasurable has been and continues to be a key strategy of dehumanization. Images of submission cemented in narratives of domination must therefore be disrupted. Disrupting narratives of domination is especially challenging because you and I (who, for example, have access to higher education) are invested in the structural problem of domination. We benefit from it. We often ignore the messy, fatal costs for our brothers and sisters, for the earth, and for our connectedness to all of God’s good creation. In MoiKonde, it was especially challenging to discern that the most empowering practices regarding education for young women eventually require their separation from the village, family, and cultural context because of the lack of access to higher education in local contexts. Education is a human right according to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of the Child; 17 how long until education is accessible to all children? Being vulnerable to the disruptions and difficult questions that accompany practices of telling and retelling misunderstanding stories can unearth counter-narratives of sharing in human dignity and creativity. Challenging normalized patterns of relationships structured by domination and submission, Benjamin argues that we human beings can participate more intentionally and more actively in processes of recognition. Benjamin defines recognition as “that response from the other which makes meaningful the feelings, intentions, and actions of the self.” 18 Recognizing another human being as both like and unlike me contributes to a deeper mutuality. Vulnerability to possibilities of mutual understanding demands openness to a constant play of resonance and difference. 19 Recognition is paradoxical in that I grow by recognizing you both as related to me and as existing in your own right without assuming that you exist for me in a posture of submission. Recognition itself sparks identity crisis because of how difficult it is to sustain in practice. Benjamin considers that “the ideal ‘resolution’ of the paradox of recognition is for it to endure and be endured as a constant tension. ” 20 She disrupts ideals of wholeness as a singular matter of individual achievement by arguing that wholeness requires the difficult practice of “maintaining contradiction.” 21 In a relational orientation toward mutual recognition, human beings live in paradoxical tension that acknowledges inevitable breakdowns and misunderstandings. Mutual love is the action of sharing in vulnerability rather than forcing vulnerability onto other human beings, which would be not vulnerability but violence. Mutual love embodied and enacted in community while acknowledging the tensions and ambiguities involved in so doing can disrupt normalized patterns that maintain, reinforce, justify, and ignore violence. Patterns of gender polarity structure social relationships in subtle and powerful ways that continually threaten possibilities of recognition. Benjamin points to liberative ways in which both theorizing about disrupting power and attempting practices with the intention of disrupting power can begin to dismantle engrained structures of polarity. 22 However, she argues for a different kind of destruction in which human beings do not destroy others and themselves through “righteous revolution” that simply tries to reverse the violence of a particular polarity by redirecting violence the other way. Like Nandy, Benjamin contends that a violent response to violence threatens human dignity for all. Rather than reversing poles of a dualism, Benjamin advocates idealism in constant tension with destruction directed toward “challeng[ing] and criticiz[ing] authority, the very persons, ideas, and institutions that have been idealized.” 23 Practices of successful destruction occur within the constant tension of recognition that restores visions and recovers practices of mutual human dignity and possibilities of sharing in experiences across a multiplicity of differences. 24 Is intercultural mutuality possible even when recognizing pervasive long held intercultural misunderstandings? Benjamin suggests that the bonds of love frame recognition paradoxically. Questioning possibilities of understanding must accompany questioning its impossibilities: “The anchoring of [the structure of domination] so deep in the psyche is what gives domination its appearance of inevitability, makes it seem that a relationship in which both participants are subjects—both empowered and mutually respectful—is impossible.” 25 Bonds of love catch human beings in a process of recognition in which each human being is considered a subject who “grow[s] in and through the relationships to other subjects.” 26 If identity crisis opens space for recognizing human dignity across human beings, then subsequent sharing in vulnerability creates opportunities for the deeper recognition of empathy. Benjamin’s psychoanalytic theory of recognition contributes to the central argument of this book: that sharing misunderstanding stories opens possibilities for deeper, more mutual understanding than previously imagined. Healthy liberative intercultural relationships recognize and navigate tension. Benjamin characterizes mutual love as the willingness to live intentionally in tension oriented toward recognizing human beings—one’s sense of personal identity and human dignity and the identity and human dignity of other human beings—without demanding or finding pleasure in submission. She writes, “The joy I take in your existence must include both my connection to you and your independent existence [which is unknown to me]—I recognize that you are real.” 27 Recognition is a practice of acknowledging the limits of knowledge as well as reevaluating prior knowledge as a challenging path that invites the conditions for resolving intercultural breaches in understanding so that reconciliation becomes possible. Nonrecognition, Suffering, and the Healing of Desire I risk participating in violence even when I alone am envisioning and trying to embody possibilities of mutual recognition for the purposes of fostering a more peaceful and mutually loving human community. We can see this in my relationship with MaLespeki where in the very process of educating future Peace Corps volunteers to respect cultural norms and practices, I violated a cultural norm and practice. In an attempt to educate not to cross the threshold of sacred spaces, I was revealing markers of sacred space. Actions oriented toward mutual respect do not always embody mutual respect. In this case, MaLespeki let me know this and I could almost immediately recognize my unintentional complicity. In other cases such as in the narrative fragment above where I simply could not wrap my head around how to move toward an embodied and communal recovery, I am responsible to ask questions and to bear to hear the response. Learning of a breach in understanding intercultural norms and practices is the beginning of a movement toward more mutual understanding and not its conclusion. Intercultural understanding is a process of learning bound in the powers of love, creativity, mystery, and intimacy that both order and disorder our life together. Both pastoral and systematic theologians grapple with theological reasons for participating with care in speaking, hearing, overhearing, and otherwise sharing in the vulnerability required by living in community oriented toward mutual understanding across cultural, historical, and other differences. Pastoral theologians have also turned to systematic theologians as partners in understanding human suffering and practices oriented toward healing. Theologians, particularly those who have engaged in the emerging field of theologies of religious pluralism, have begun to produce scholarship to help better understand intercultural misunderstanding. One such scholar is constructive theologian Wendy Farley. Like Fanon, Farley argues that we may become skilled in recognizing ourselves (though this takes a great deal of courage) but often fail each other with our lack of desire for mutual recognition. Farley invites us to consider despair as a form of suffering in which we all need to recognize our part. We cannot ask “how long?” without actively participating in suffering in solidarity with neighbors. Yet, recognizing our participation in suffering often threatens to immobilize us in despair. Acknowledging this is what promises to move us into new possibilities of understanding. Pastoral theologians can find resources for attending to recognition through Farley’s The Wounding and Healing of Desire: Weaving Heaven and Earth ( 2005 ). In her book, Farley argues that “there is a sense in which we hardly exist without recognition.” 28 She warns of the damage that results without sufficient attention to recognition: “My instinctual knowledge that I am not one iota more important or real than anyone or anything else does not translate into felt experience. In the absence of an immediate awareness of others as vivid as my awareness of myself, I will constantly act out of this root experience of the brilliance of my own experience and the comparatively pale, tepid, and inessential reality of everything else.” 29 The human longing for fulfillment tempts us to find solace and comfort in finite things that cannot by definition endure through eternity. Like Benjamin, Farley argues that the human tendency to find fulfillment in our idea of what an other(ed) human being should be for our own benefit limits possibilities of mutuality. 30 Farley contends that we “inhabit” desire in ways that are deeply problematic to ourselves, the world, and one another. 31 She writes, “We want what we want and deplore the thought that we inhabit the webs that carry the consequences of our actions far beyond us.” 32 The core of the problem is the human tendency to possess that which or whom we desire, which upsets the kind of negotiated tension Benjamin argues is a condition for the possibility of mutual understanding. Farley’s theological anthropology depicts human beings as highly skilled in what postcolonial theorists call masking. Postcolonial theorists across genres and academic disciplines point to the ways that physical distance from human beings deemed as “other” facilitates psychological distance and leads to what mistakenly appears to be the justified violence of dehumanization. Farley argues that the “most dangerous temptations”—the ways we deceive ourselves into believing that a neighbor’s suffering is not like my suffering, and that a neighbor’s healing is not like my healing—these “most dangerous temptations are present in the guise of something we think of as good.” 33 What becomes good in my mind starts to resemble self-deception fueled by a perception that I am unlike all others, what Farley and others call egocentricism. The woundedness we embody is that we humans often disguise this as good. As the delusion of totalizing self-sufficiency seeps into our heart’s desire, Farley points out that we risk taking on “massive responsibility [that] maintains others in dependence.” 34 If I am responsible for the whole world as a disembodied idea, then I don’t need to listen to you and therefore can “legitimately” minimize you, continuing to fray the threads of our many connections, including the paramount connection of all humans in the imago dei. In terms of recognition, if I inhabit the representation of myself as savior, then I simply work tirelessly to save the world without feeling the need to recognize anyone else as a partner in the process. As novelist and nonfiction writer Anne Lamott writes, “You can safely assume you’ve created God in your own image when it turns out that God hates all the same people you do.” 35 Farley argues that the woundedness of our desires harms our image of ourselves, neighboring human beings, and of God. To resist colluding in this harm, development work must therefore be oriented by a model of mutual partnership rather than a morally hierarchical approach that appeals to a distorted analogy to developmental psychology. Woundedness, by not being shared, endures. In other words, vulnerability unshared becomes not one-sided vulnerability but violence for both the one who claims invulnerability and the one violently ordered to submit. The woundedness of our desire cuts us off from ourselves, from our neighbors, and indeed from God. Farley outlines a vision of dressing these deep and divisive wounds: The vividness of [my egocentric self-awareness as a person isolated in my ego] produces the illusion that we exist alone, trapped with our ceaselessly nagging fears and hopes, sufferings and desires. In this way we are bereft of the consolations of companionship, sharing only faint shadows of the joy of intimacy or compassion in suffering. Our emotional and spiritual life denigrates into a struggle with passions that bind us ever more tightly to our sorry attempts to ease our pain. But as the ever-fresh rivers of the Divine Eros flow through us, this illusion and its debilitating consequences dissipate. Our natural powers for joy and compassion, the strength of our courage, and the light of wisdom trickle through the bars of our prison. 36 Farley hopes that there is a hinge, a place to pivot from isolationism and individualism toward deeper connections to oneself, other human beings, the world, and God. Like identities, the intricacies of passionate, deeper connection in postcolonial contexts are complexly multiple. 37 When we become aware, really become aware of our complicity, we must receive the rage that flows as a consequence of the violence of embodying a dehumanizing gaze toward other human beings. An enormous amount of sharing in vulnerability, courage, responsibility, and work to maintain avenues for participation is required to resist the often overwhelming tendency to fight, flight, or freeze in relation to learning of my complicity. Sharing in vulnerability includes recognizing a range of emotions in community. After viewing a recent documentary about a 1921 race riot with consequences for all of us, my class voiced their emotional responses ranging from despair, anger, rage, helplessness, and hopelessness to a sense of openness, possibility, courage, and hope. As pastoral theologian Lee Butler defines it in relation to the legacy of slavery in the United States, “Rage develops when my humanity is denied and my existence is controlled by a force that seeks to diminish my identity.” 38 Both Butler and Farley find hope in the midst of rage. However, hope is not to shield ourselves from expressions and realities of rage. Hope stands in the midst of difficult conversations that acknowledge the rage that emerges when we see and hear the extent to which the beloved human community—the earth, the silenced millions of women, children, men—continues to be torn apart by violence masquerading as benevolent good deeds. Rage says “no” clearly. It is a dissonant ringing in our ears. Hopefully! Hope in the midst of rage helps engineer the hinges as places of turning and reconnecting. When we can sustain vulnerability in the process of unearthing past suffering and attending present suffering, hope is “more secure” because it accounts for the not-yet-possible but never impossible: that healing is possible. 39 Acknowledging that healing is not yet fully present requires seeing and raging at the suffering that is and that I maintain by my investment in disconnections. Butler writes, “the task... is not to deny the rage, but to transform its energy into a creative force.” 40 Farley adds that “rage becomes the divine energy of compassionate wrath.” 41 Farley reminds Christians that divine creativity “entered into the world in a human body through the blood and pain and muck of childbirth” 42 without the sterility of a modern hospital delivery room. Divine and human creativity meet in the “anguish of suffering... in refugee camps, in hunger, in greed and violence, in self-hatred and paralysis, in illness that opens up only on more pain, in prisons and the terror of dangerous homes, in the emptiness of luxury and meaningless work.” 43 Divine and human creativity meet in the suffering of non-recognition. Courage to tell, retell, hear, and overhear misunderstanding stories for the sake of deeper and more mutual recognition is messy, creative, empowering work. Neither the misunderstanding stories shared in this book nor your misunderstanding stories evoked by this book have clear resolutions. The work of our calling as leaders in participating in God’s justice on earth through tikkun olam, participating as partners in the work of mending the woundedness of creation, invites this challenging and courageous work of vulnerability. Participating in partnerships of mutuality involves neighbor love. Central to both Jewish and Christian ethics, love of neighbor flows from participating in love of God. Neighbor love has come to serve as a bridge of understanding across religious differences where Christians can embody this moral duty through joining in dialogue with other human beings, who represent both Christianity and other religious traditions, to love in the face of dehumanizing poverty, victimization, violence, patriarchy, and other colonizing strategies of non-recognition between human beings and within all of creation. 44 In the face of differences that often make mutuality tense and misunderstanding likely, neighbor love offers a model for moving toward the deeper recognition of mutual intercultural empathy: Love requires not just that we do “good” to others but that we respect them, affirm them, listen to them, and be ready to learn from them. To truly love others, we have to stand ready to receive from them, at least as much as we hope to give to them. If “doing good” is not accompanied by respect and mutuality, then love becomes patronizing kindness. Which means it is no longer love. Love calls for relationships of mutuality in which there is reciprocal giving and taking, teaching and learning, speaking and listening. And that’s what dialogue is all about. “Love thy neighbor” means “Dialogue with thy neighbor.” 45 How better to resist the distancing gaze that lingers on as a legacy of colonialism than to be neighborly in our postcolonial context? Recognizing that we participate in the postcolonial world for good and for ill calls for a new honesty in relation to what neighbor love means. Postcolonial neighbor love involves owning up to my social location and the privileges afforded me at the expense of neighboring human beings. Desiring not to know the suffering I perpetuate is a product of the woundedness of desire. The identity crises that raise questions for me about who I am and who we are prompt disciplined reflection and self-awareness that opens me to growing, changing, shifting, and moving. Participating in the surrender and catch of cognitive love not only opens questions about previously held assumptions but also reveals to me my complicity in suffering. But it doesn’t have to end there in despair. When caught up in moments of distilled awareness, a new kind of neighbor love begins in vulnerability to learning and proceeds toward a deeper recognition of mutual understanding. Recognition exists only within our past and present entanglements with harmful ways of life. 46 And dehumanizing practices of non-recognition remain: what is harmful is often disguised as good. What a challenge therefore to see clearly! What courage required to acknowledge misunderstanding harm for good! Farley imagines possibilities of recognition as “the loving delight that others exist” 47 not for or because of my benevolence but with me and I with other human beings as we navigate the ambivalence of our desires. And so, I must ask myself, others, the world, and God to what extent I understand. I must probe the extent to which I am vulnerable to questions. When we can bear to listen to what is said, to that which necessarily exceeds my knowledge and awareness, recognition becomes more possible. Human stories of suffering and healing become our story unable to be possessed by any one of us to the detriment of all. The misunderstanding story represented in the narrative fragments of each chapter describes a multilayered breach in intercultural understanding, raises questions of identity, and yearns for resolution and reconciliation. This movement is facilitated in community. We become more mutual partners in healing when we can recognize shared stories as necessarily complex and ambiguous. Can we learn to be vulnerable to “bear the truths that few want to hear” where vulnerability is safely shared albeit risky? 48 How might we practice this deep and courageous co-participation? Studying psychological and theological perspectives on the woundedness of desire is relevant today in a postcolonial context of systemic inequality and strategic dehumanization. This interdisciplinary study of desire merits attention in part because the authors participate in privilege and seek to dismantle it from within their American contexts. Many seminary students and leaders in ministry aim to do the same in their religious vocations. Both Benjamin and Farley weave personal/individuated and social/systemic motivations for, embodiments of, and consequences of desire. Both theorize possibilities for healing the woundedness of desire in a postcolonial context. In a postcolonial context attentive to interdisciplinary conversation partners and partnering with accounts of lived experiences, pastoral theory is well poised to consider voice and vulnerability. Coauthoring Vulnerability Given that desire is wounded by the polarities that structure myths of the legitimacy of dehumanization, desiring to co-author rather than author stories is a resistive strategy that requires vulnerability to partnering. A practice of coauthoring recognizes that no one person authors any story. 49 The concept of coauthoring helps us to understand ministry practices, and it also helps me reflect on the integrity of my academic contribution. Our disciplined practice of writing through journaling sustained over our two years living in MoiKonde enabled me to take ownership of my own assumptions, moments of intercultural understandings, and complex intercultural misunderstanding stories. My academic contribution as a pastoral theologian and Christian ethicist includes narrative fragments as the fruit of revisiting my own journal writing and revisiting partners in MoiKonde for subsequent conversation and communal reflection. It also evokes my own affective experiences, memories of what I hope are shared experiences, and contradictions I embody as a returned Peace Corps volunteer. Writing, both personal and academic, can facilitate opening to vulnerability that becomes a robust basis for hope. Writing creates room for shared vulnerability and negotiating silences, but I don’t have the last word. As a pastoral theologian, I leave open the possibility that I didn’t hear well, that I don’t remember well, that there is more to learn through communal partnerships. Pastoral theologian and ethnographer Mary Moschella defines coauthoring as participating in possibilities for an open future oriented toward mutual transformation: Understanding our historical, religious, and cultural particularity through ethnography strengthens our clarity and resolve as we strive to co-author a more faithful, just, and life-giving future... we have at least some freedom to alter the scripts we speak and the actions we perform... With this power comes the responsibility to speak wisely and fairly, to exercise power with the people, helping people find voice, rather than speaking for them, or exercising power over them... And in any ethnography, even if research is conducted well, the narratives composed have the potential to inflict harm upon the participants. Ethnographic portraits, like mirrors, may startle or confuse as well as empower or liberate. 50 Narratives enlist authors and readers in the participatory exercise of scripting future possibilities. Narrative structures can point to problems, grab attention, evoke affective experiences, and transform memories. 51 Encountering stories that matter in the midst of participating in the play of listening and hearing leads to academic obligations of telling and retelling misunderstanding stories. 52 Coauthoring is a practice of navigating tensions around silence and voice through humility and care in academic writing. Telling, retelling, hearing, and overhearing misunderstanding stories recognize human finitude that both prevents complete understanding and recognize that narratives of complete understanding therefore necessarily dehumanize. In a variety of ways, pastoral theologians have long recognized that I cannot and should not always be the story-teller but must first and foremost be a story-listener. How do I then navigate the tensions between silence and speech? It is we who come to be in community and to behold community through writing. 53 Reflecting on voice as a moral concern includes recognizing that choosing a voice is a privilege of both writing and textuality. When ought silence be considered a last resort, or an immoral option? On one hand, silence is associated with deep reverence and intimate experiences of awe, wonder, and stillness. Silence, or the pursuit of silence, accompanies many meditative and spiritual practices oriented toward calming or awakening. Silence can also be claimed as a tool of protest. For example, silence can serve to protect dignity and safety within vulnerable populations. 54 Many have recognized the importance of silence among women survivors of sexualized violence. 55 Silence can be a trust-gathering space for persons rightly not yet ready for a more intimate vulnerability. Pastoral theologians are deeply attentive to the value of silence, as the practice of listening is at the heart of pastoral presence. 56 Silence opens new ways of listening, discerning, hearing, and practicing. Silence invites mystery, spiritual formation, and unimagined possibilities. Silence also indicts. Institutional silence, which is deeply engrained in and around us, justifies and normalizes the violence of both commission and omission. Institutional silences regarding sexism or racism or heterosexism or ableism render differences invisible and force normative declarations. 57 Yet, one must ask, is it even possible to speak or come to voice other than through colonizing means? I write as a returned Peace Corps volunteer and recognize the responsibilities and choices played out in lived experiences involved in embodying the role in a particular way. How can I write while being self-reflective, remaining open to being mistaken, realizing possibilities for both understanding and misunderstanding, participating in sustainability, and sustaining vulnerability to learning? Responsible writing is deeply connected to social concerns of both local and global communities. For example, African theologian Musa Dube asks how anyone in any discipline can write without addressing HIV/AIDS as a global crisis. 58 Scholars who write on the Shoah ask how anyone in theology can write anything that could be used to justify burning children. 59 How can we write without mentioning that some governments are considering instituting the death penalty for homosexual acts? 60 At the time of completing this book, the United States is caught up in the systemic dehumanization unmasked by the recent killing of African America teen Trayvon Martin. Do you see the human rights violations in the world at this moment? Where is the imago dei being denied to some of God’s children? Where am I participating in, condoning, ignoring violence at home and abroad? Writing is necessarily limited by authorial voice(s), context(s), and the limits of language(s); however, we must yet strive to represent suffering and healing in as much complexity as possible given the limitations. Moschella writes, “Be careful not to overgeneralize. Instead, offer some of the ‘situated wisdom’ of your setting. Hold your new wisdom lightly; offer it gently as a gift, not arrogantly as a rule.” 61 Hopefully, writing itself as provisional understanding opens pathways to more mutual understanding. Responsibly beholding misunderstanding stories includes retelling, reinterpreting, analyzing, writing with integrity, and engaging the disturbing realities of the day. Writing reveals my “assumptions, presumptions, and contradictions” in a way that silence cannot. 62 However, writing is also affected by the ways in which it is embodied. 63 Consider the following reflections on writing and voicing from diverse sources: It’s because we can reflect on and identify what we do as well as just doing it that we can exercise moral judgement; it’s because we can choose what we do, rather than being over-determined by instinct or destiny, that we ought to exercise that judgement. Language, which enables these capacities by providing the tools—a symbolic register—in which to process them, is often identified as a key to human identity. And the capacities for reflection and selection are so significant for the writing process they suggest we could think of writing as a form of responsibility to our material. 64 Gray Panthers founder Maggie Kuhn said: Speak your mind even if your voice shakes... It hits you, doesn’t it? Right there. Suddenly, you have permission not to be perfect or polished or even particularly brave. It’s not who hears you that matters. It’s the speaking up that’ll save you every time. And here’s the thing about that shaky voice. People will listen anyway. I see it time and time again as I travel the state and meet women who just can’t be silent any longer... “My voice is not real strong, and it usually shakes,” [one woman] said softly as she grabbed my hand before speaking. “But sometimes. Sometimes, I think if I don’t speak out? Well, I’m afraid I will lose my mind.” A few minutes later, she took the stage. Her voice shook that night, just as she feared, and she stumbled over her words a few times as she shifted from side to side. But for the entire time that she spoke, her soft, trembling voice was the only sound in the room. 65 First they came for the Socialists, and I did not speak out— Because I was not a Socialist. Then they came for the Trade Unionists, and I did not speak out— Because I was not a Trade Unionist. Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out— Because I was not a Jew. Then they came for me—and there was no one left to speak for me. 66 Silence is the real crime against humanity. 67 Responsible writing as coauthoring negotiates tensions around silence and speech in part by being vulnerable to questions about my understanding and misunderstanding. On a regular basis, I can ask and then bear to hear or be asked and then bear to respond to questions: What is missing? Where are the silences? How are the silences oppressive and/or liberative? 68 Where are we silencing? How am I exercising my voice? How is this method of writing and speaking and ministering responsible? Stories of untold, unnamed memorials must be unearthed from the writing of those who have had privileged voices and access to the printed, published word. What may need to be unearthed from my storying? Writers like the above who probe silence and suffering remind us of responsibilities to voice embodied memories that live and breathe on against all odds. Pastoral theologians have honed the craft of approaching the privilege of writing with an orientation toward rich description as “faithful and recognizable description of a setting or an experience.” 69 Complex misunderstanding stories, especially when told in multiple ways, can handle such tensions. 70 It is not my goal to resolve tensions but instead to lift them up as significant aspects of intercultural encounters. I am persuaded by Benjamin, Farley, Butler, and Moschella that living in and with tensions is a condition for resolving intercultural crises in understanding and the subsequent identity crises that threaten to activate resistance or despair and instead can activate a deeper and more mutual understanding. A Spectrum of Sharing in Vulnerability Sharing in vulnerability can empower bodies and embodied communities when it bridges the reflective work of identity crisis and the affective openness to neighbor love. The word share is related in Old English and Dutch to the word shear, “to cut or to divide.” A contemporary definition of share reads, “to join with others or to receive in common with others.” 71 Sharing as a receptive gesture leaves one vulnerable to a new experience. Openness to the provisional status of understanding shared experience is an experience of vulnerability because of its acknowledgement of partiality, limitations, capacity for change. In MoiKonde, I yearned for reconciliation in the middle of the story, the same place of maximal disruption, confusion, identity crisis, and misunderstanding. Eventually, through disciplined effort in community and not without confronting the tense woundedness of desire for learning, formal pathways of conflict resolution opened. The misunderstanding story went public. Yet, the peace, relief, and neighbor love of reconciliation were not yet realized. Rather, sharing in the vulnerability required for mutual learning opened hope for future peace, relief, and neighbor love. Formal recognition of other human beings as partners in community opened potential space for transforming understanding. In these tense, in-between spaces of misunderstanding stories, practices of attention, when sustained, must resist the competing temptations of despair or self-righteousness non-recognition. When sharing in vulnerability in the classroom, ministry students often ask for “the right answer” to any number of imaginable pastoral dilemmas. What is a healing response, and what creates more harm when another human being shares an experience of suffering? Hearing and telling of human suffering with these questions in mind can unmask connections and disconnections within and among human beings. The only certain answer to any dilemma is that we don’t know ahead of the shared experience what will be healing and what will be harmful. Therefore, good enough pastoral practice includes being vulnerable to the questions: What are you going through? Am I helping or harming? The even more challenging next step is to bear to hear the response: the silences, the words that emerge from courageous encounter. Attending to suffering is the starting point of pastoral theology. It is also the starting point of any act of pastoral care or pastoral counseling. My experiences living in a post-colony help me understand how difficult it is to attend to suffering. 72 The stakes are high: our embodied and historied limitations blind us to the suffering in our midst, particularly suffering we perpetuate without even consciously knowing. The theories reviewed in this chapter help us understand suffering as a complex phenomenon in which we all participate. Attending to suffering is facilitated by sharing in vulnerability, being open to receiving a share in new experiences. Being vulnerable to learning includes attending to precisely those places of deep misunderstanding in all aspects of life. Sharing in vulnerability is a resistive counterpoint to practices of gazing supported by dehumanizing representations of other people and resultant habits of non-recognition. Telling and retelling, hearing and overhearing misunderstanding stories can help train faculties of attention required for enduring the sustained presence of shared experiences. Only after engaging this challenging work of attention can we leaders in ministry then begin to participate in healing that endures. I aim to advance a participatory model of healing. The basic idea is that caregivers do not transmit healing to a person in need. A participatory model of healing disrupts the whole idea of one person who merely gives care to another needy person who merely receives. What offers healing is a relational practice in which both the so-called caregiver and the so-called care receiver participate in the caring encounter: both are in need, both give, and both receive. Students of religion continue to be moved by Martin Luther King Jr.’s conviction that the long arc of history bends toward justice. I desire that students be moved and I with them—but the desire to be moved issues a call to participate in movement, which is never easy and always involves ambiguity. Some students fight this task. Others seek to lead immediate concrete progress toward justice. Some freeze in exasperation. The task is so complex and unfinished. The very forces that motivate optimism toward realizing justice can also impede possibilities of recognition that mutual sharing in justice requires. One of the many paradoxes of privilege is that the desire to heal the wounds made apparent by postcolonialism is itself entwined in systems of oppression that frustrate and impede desire leading to systemic change. We cannot just go in and bend the arc of history toward our own isolated and privileged visions of justice. Rather, we must work together to envision partnerships across differences wherein the arc that connects colonial histories with more liberative, open futures bends through relationships of mutual learning as movement toward new possibilities. When we returned to MoiKonde with a renewed commitment to intercultural partnership at the same time that its possibility was most severely challenged for us, the bridge into the village happened to be impassable and under repair. This physical impasse symbolized much more than heavy seasonal rains and issued an invitation into the challenging work of intercultural understanding. While formal processes reopened bridges to understanding, more work awaits. 1. Gill-Austern, “Engaging Diversity and Difference,” 33. 2. Lartey, In Living Color, 32 – 34. 3. This same tension often structures congregational and denominational conflict, as well as other contexts for interpersonal misunderstanding and disagreement. 4. Turner, From Ritual to Theatre, 11. 5. Tickle, The Great Emergence. 6. Benjamin writes, “The problem with this formulation is the idea of separation from oneness; it contains the implicit assumption that we grow out of relationships rather than becoming more active and sovereign within them; that we start in a state of dual oneness and wind up in a state of singular oneness” (Benjamin, The Bonds of Love, 18 ). See also Mahler et al., The Psychological Birth of the Human Infant. 7. Benjamin, The Bonds of Love, 24. 8. Ibid., 25. 9. Ibid., 181, 112, 114. 10. Ibid., 211. 11. Ibid., 7, 184, 172 – 73. 12. Ibid., 45. 13. For example, Belenky et al., Women’s Ways of Knowing. 14. For example, Neuger, Counseling Women. 15. For example, Marshall, Counseling Lesbian Partners. 16. For example, Tatum, “Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?”; Van Beek, Cross-Cultural Counseling. 17. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on Human Rights, Convention on the Rights of the Child. See Article 28; online: http://www 2.ohchr.org/english/law/crc.htm/. 18. Benjamin, The Bonds of Love, 12. 19. Ibid., 30, 26. 20. Ibid., 36. 21. Ibid., 63. 22. Ibid., 223. 23. Ibid., 293 n 56. 24. Ibid. 25. Ibid., 8. 26. Ibid., 19 – 20. 27. Ibid., 15. 28. Farley, The Wounding and Healing of Desire, 5. 29. Ibid., 49. 30. Ibid., 16. 31. Ibid., 13. 32. Ibid., 66. 33. Ibid., 75. 34. Ibid., 91. 35. Lamott, Bird by Bird, 22. 36. Farley, The Wounding and Healing of Desire, 34. 37. Gloria Wekker and Philomena Essed explore the intricacies of passionate, deeper connection in postcolonial Suriname (Wekker, Politics of Passion; Essed, Everyday Racism ). 38. Butler, Liberating Our Dignity, 165. 39. Lester, Hope in Pastoral Care and Counseling, 64 – 65. 40. Butler, Liberating Our Dignity, 165. 41. Farley, The Wounding and Healing of Desire, 34 42. Ibid., 105. 43. Farley, Gathering Those Driven Away, 155 – 56. 44. Knitter, Introducing Theologies of Religions, 137. 45. Ibid., 102 46. Farley, The Wounding and Healing of Desire, 93. 47. Ibid., 34. 48. Rambo, Spirit and Trauma, 150. 49. Moschella, Ethnography as a Pastoral Practice, 238. 50. Moschella, Ethnography as a Pastoral Practice, 238 – 39, 253 (italics original). 51. Carroll, “Narrative and the Ethical Life,” 44, 52. 52. Zaner, “On the Telling of Stories”; See also Zaner, Conversations of the Edge. 53. Holmes and Farley, Women Writing Theology; Greider et al., “Three Generations of Women Writing for Our Lives.” Decentered writing in community opens one to being moved (see also Moody-Adams, Fieldwork in Familiar Places; Behar, The Vulnerable Observer ). 54. See Annica Kronsell’s example of military women who, when invited to participate in interviews, remained silent so as not to be singled out from their male counterparts more than they already were by the visible mark of gender (in Kronsell, “Methods for Studying Silences,” 122 ). 55. See D’Costa, “Marginalized Identity”; Fortune, Sexual Violence; Leslie, When Violence Is No Stranger. 56. For example, see Dittes, Pastoral Counseling; Justes, Hearing beyond the Words. 57. See for example, Kronsell, “Methods for Studying Silences,” 109. 58. Dube,“ Go tla Siama. O tla Fola. ” 59. Halivni, The Book and the Sword. 60. “Uganda: International Bar Association’s Human Rights Institute (IBAHRI) Condemns Introduction of Death Penalty for ‘Aggravated Homosexuality.’” 61. Moschella, Ethnography as a Pastoral Practice, 211. 62. D’Costa, “Marginalized Identity,” 149. 63. Hunt, 144 64. Hunt and Sampson, Writing, 153, italics in original. 65. Schultz, Connie, “Fearless Politics: Speak Your Mind Even If Your Voice Shakes.” Posted on www.huffingtonpost.com/ on September 4, 2006; online: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/connie-schultz/fearless-politics-speak-_b_ 28706.html/. 66. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Holocaust Encyclopedia, “Martin Niemöller.” 67. Sarah Berkowitz, quoted in Mitchell, Plantations and Death Camps, 109. 68. We can point to recent examples of genocide, human trafficking, complex systems of economic disempowerment, and countless other examples. 69. Moschella, Ethnography as a Pastoral Practice, 198. 70. Ibid., 203. 71. Online: http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/share 72. Weil, “Reflections on the Right Use of School Studies with a View to the Love of God,” 64 – 65.