5 Knowing Your Boundaries It’s hard to know when a boundary is being violated when you don’t know you’re entitled to set and maintain boundaries at all. In 2020, Black Panther actor Chadwick Boseman died. To fans and many people, it was shocking. Some began to question why Chadwick kept his diagnosis of cancer a secret. On my Instagram account, I wrote this: Let’s allow Chadwick Boseman to be a shining example of honoring our boundaries. He shared his health issues with the people he chose and continued to live his dream. We can keep things to ourselves. We can be private. Privacy is not secret-keeping; it’s sharing with trusted loved ones and sharing with others when we are ready. Privacy is a healthy boundary. You do not owe anyone more than you are comfortable sharing. People are not entitled to know your personal business. Privacy is a boundary, and you can share as much or as little as you want. The Six Types of Boundaries Physical Personal space and physical touch are your physical boundaries. Your physical space is the perimeter around your body. We all have a certain level of awareness of our body and what feels comfortable to us, and everyone’s needs in terms of physical space are different. People also have different views as to what types and amounts of physical touch are appropriate. These boundaries vary depending on the setting and situation, the relationship we have with the other person, and our comfort level. But we can tell people our preferences about personal space and physical touch. Sexual It’s never okay to touch anyone’s body without consent, and children can never consent to sexual acts. Touching, making sexual comments, or engaging in sexual acts without expressed consent violate sexual boundaries. It’s never acceptable for children to be placed in any sexual situation—even a sexual conversation in their presence. Since children can’t communicate sexual limits, adults must adhere to appropriate behavior with children. Unlike other boundaries that need to be spoken to be understood, many sexual ones are unspoken because they are society’s rules. These include rape, assault, and molestation. There are laws against forcible sexual acts. However, many things that are not illegal can violate someone’s boundaries, such as talking about someone’s body in a way that makes them uncomfortable. You can speak your boundaries about your body to guide people in communicating with you physically or verbally. Intellectual Intellectual boundaries refer to your thoughts and ideas. You’re free to have an opinion about anything you want. And when you express your opinion, your words shouldn’t be dismissed, belittled, or ridiculed. However, staying mindful of what topics are appropriate versus inappropriate in a specific situation is another way of respecting intellectual boundaries. When a parent has an inappropriate conversation with a child, it’s an intellectual boundary violation. Remember This: Sometimes, the boundary is living your life according to your plans for yourself. It’s okay to listen to others when what they say is valuable and helpful, but it’s also good to stay mindful of who is offering their take about what’s best for you. When people tell you what you “should” do, know that staying on track with your goals is adhering to your boundaries. Emotional When you share your feelings, it’s reasonable to expect others to support you. For some of us, expressing emotions isn’t easy. So when someone belittles your emotions or invalidates your feelings, they are violating your emotional boundaries. This can make you feel uncomfortable the next time you want to express what you feel. With healthy emotional boundaries, you express your feelings and personal information to others gradually, not all at once. This also means you share only when it’s appropriate, and you choose your confidants carefully. Remember This: Sometimes, a boundary with yourself means sharing only what you want other people to know while keeping the rest to yourself. You have a right to privacy even when people request more information. Others don’t have to understand your boundaries to honor them. Material Material boundaries have to do with your possessions. Your stuff is your stuff. If you decide to share your stuff, it’s your choice. You also have the right to determine how others treat your possessions. If you loan a tool in good condition to a friend, it’s appropriate to expect the tool to be returned in the same shape. When someone returns something in worse condition or doesn’t return it at all, they’ve violated your material boundaries. Time Time boundaries consist of how you manage your time, how you allow others to use your time, how you deal with favor requests, and how you structure your free time. People with time boundary issues struggle with work-life balance, self-care, and prioritizing their needs. Giving up your time to others is one significant way that you might violate your time boundaries. If you don’t have time for something that you want to do, you don’t have healthy boundaries with time. EXERCISE Now that you’re familiar with the six types of boundaries, let’s practice. For each of the six types, write a boundary that you would like to set for yourself. Physical Sexual Intellectual Emotional Material Time For each of the six boundary types, describe a way that your boundary has been violated. Physical Sexual Intellectual Emotional Material Time Pause: Take a moment to reflect on your words before moving on, and take a few moments to breathe if you need to. Sometimes, it’s easier to see when others violate our boundaries, and it’s less obvious to see when we are overstepping others’ boundaries. Impeding on someone else’s boundaries doesn’t make you a bad person. Most often, it happens because we’re unaware of what makes a relationship healthy or unhealthy. Whether you have intentionally or unintentionally violated someone’s boundaries, it’s essential to be honest with yourself. EXERCISE “I have dishonored other people’s boundaries in the following ways...” Physical Sexual Intellectual Emotional Material Time JOURNAL PROMPT After acknowledging how you’ve violated someone else’s boundaries, write about how these revelations about yourself make you feel. Micro Violations Boundary micro violations are small violations that often occur in everyday encounters, as opposed to long-term relationships. We aren’t usually as emotionally affected by them, and they don’t spill over into the rest of our day, because we don’t view the encounters as significant. Micro boundary violations can become more important over time, however, if they are repeated and persistent. Examples of micro boundary violations: 1. You decline a lunch invitation from your coworker. Over the next two days, your usually chatty coworker doesn’t speak to you. 2. You are standing in line at the store and trying to maintain a six-foot distance. Despite signage posted and your attempts to create space, the person behind you is standing too close. Addressing micro violations eliminates the opportunity for things to evolve into macro violations. Also, addressing the micro offense may give you the courage to address the macro offenses. Macro Violations Boundary macro violations are significant violations that erode the fabric of our relationships with others. These are long-standing and persistent. Their frequency and intensity can even change the structure of a relationship. Examples of macro boundary violations: 1. Whenever you discuss financial achievements with your brother, he asks to borrow money. 2. Your parents gossip about your siblings’ relationships with their partners. It makes you feel uncomfortable to be involved in the conversation. EXERCISE Please list the boundary issues in each category that you’ve experienced in your relationships. Micro Boundary Issues Macro Boundary Issues Gather Yourself This chapter encouraged you to look at how your boundaries are violated and how you might violate other people’s boundaries. After identifying how you’ve violated someone else’s boundaries, practice being compassionate with yourself. Forgive yourself, and do better going forward.