11 You Are Choosing Your Life When You Choose a Partner Romantic Relationships We create healthy romantic partnerships when we allow each other to grow, shift, and feel safe and honored. Relationships that seem perfect are the result of doing the work. CHECKING IN Select the boxes below that are true for your current romantic relationship: Your commitment to each other is clear. You and your partner compromise to make things work. You can communicate your needs and opinions. You feel safe physically. You support each other. You feel safe being yourself. You can respectfully disagree. You speak kindly to each other. Your growth is not a threat to the relationship. You’re able to grow together. In a romantic relationship, partners make agreements with each other. Sometimes, those agreements are explicitly stated: “I will cook dinner four or five times a week.” Other times, the agreements are implicit, such as not typically making any attempts to cook dinner. Using the space below, list the explicit and implicit agreements in your relationship. Explicit agreements: Implicit agreements: Even if you’ve never spoken up for yourself in your relationship, you can start today. What are your top three unmet needs you’d like to express to your partner? Is your partner aware of these needs? What can you say or do to make your needs clear to your partner? Partnering with someone is one of the most important decisions we make in life. The person you decide to spend your life with can impact your finances, relationships with others, mental health, and overall quality of life. In choosing a partner, you are choosing your quality of life. Pay Attention to the Signs Green Flags Positive indicators that demonstrate healthy qualities, such as being a good listener or showing a willingness to understand an opposing perspective. Yellow Flags Potential areas of concern that have not reached their peak but certainly cause worry. Example: The person you’re dating doesn’t have any friends and speaks about most relationships in a disparaging way. Red Flags If someone is harmful to others or to themselves, liking them isn’t a reason to continue a romantic relationship with them. Clear indications of danger should never be ignored, as red flags tend to plague relationships long-term. Example: You’re dating someone with significant financial issues who always asks to borrow money without paying it back. In the following exercise, respond to the prompts about your current romantic relationship or a relationship from the past. Name the green flags: Name the yellow flags: Name the red flags: You Cannot Change People Rather than dating someone you want to change, it’s best to date the type of person you truly want to be with in a relationship. In my years of working with couples, I’ve seen that one thing is for sure: Over time, people become more themselves in relationships. If there’s something that bothers you, set your expectations early and realistically. Important Reminder: Sometimes you have to accept people or situations as they are without changing them. Acceptance is not an easy process, but neither is resisting the truth. It can be hard to accept things that you wish would change. But admitting what you can and can’t control is best for your mental health. Acceptance allows you to stop struggling, but it doesn’t mean that you are giving up hope. Repeat Yourself You will have to repeat yourself to get what you want. In many cases, your partner won’t remember every request you’ve made. Asking them to honor your boundaries is similar to asking them to practice a new habit. It’s a process to learn and apply new information consistently. Repeating myself makes me feel ______________. For my partner to hear me, I will repeat the following boundary: Once I’ve repeated my boundaries several times, if they’re still dishonored, I can do or say the following: Setting Expectations in Relationships Sometimes, we learn our needs by knowing what is and isn’t working. It’s okay if your expectations in the relationship are different from what others may want or need in their relationships. For instance, you may enjoy sleeping in a separate bedroom from your snoring partner. This arrangement might not work for other couples, but if it works for you, continue with it. Make a list of what’s working in your relationship. Make a list of what you would like to improve in your relationship. Pause: Who is your boundary hero? Think of a person in your life who reflects the type of boundaries that you would like to express and maintain. Humans Are Imperfect You are human. You aren’t perfect, and neither is your partner. When you make requests of others, you’re asking them to change their habits. Take a moment to consider how challenging it is to change your habits, even when you want to do it. I found it challenging to change the following habits: Example: Greeting my partner when they arrived home for work was a difficult adjustment for me. I still have a hard time changing the following habits: Example: My partner constantly reminds me to put my phone away while we’re talking. When my partner has a difficult time remembering my boundaries, I can remind myself of the following: Example: Changing habits isn’t easy. Talking About Solutions In relationships, it’s quite common to talk about problems as if there weren’t a solution. Talking about the solution is a way to minimize the drama and move forward. In truth, you often know the solution, and waiting for the other person to guess what it is won’t help you get your point across. Let’s practice talking about the solution in a few common relationship situations. Scenario: Your partner tells you what to do instead of listening to you vent. Solution: “I want you to listen instead of telling me what to do. I just need to get my frustrations out.” Scenario: Your partner took money from the joint savings account without talking to you about the withdrawal. Solution: Scenario: You are tired of planning the vacations for the family all by yourself. Solution: We Learn from Example What did you learn about romantic relationships from your parents? What do you want to do differently from what you witnessed with your parents? Gather Yourself We’re all human and flawed. As humans, we don’t always get things right, but we can evolve into better versions of ourselves. What came up for you while going through this chapter?