13 WORKing on Your Boundaries The average full-time employee works forty-plus hours a week. That’s more time than you spend in any other setting, so how you function in the work space is critical. WORK ASSESSMENT Place a check mark next to each area that you struggle with at work: Doing work for others Being asked about personal issues Taking on more than you can handle Not delegating Flirting Working without pay Not taking advantage of vacation days Saying yes to tasks you can’t responsibly complete Engaging in stressful interactions Working during downtime Doing jobs intended for more than one person Not taking needed time off For each of the areas you selected, name one needed boundary. Remember to frame your boundaries with “I need,” “I expect,” or “I want.” Likes and Dislikes Every job has aspects you love and aspects you ’ d rather do without. I love my job as a therapist, but I don’t like certain administrative tasks like billing. Even though I don’t like these tasks, they’re essential if I want to be paid for the parts of the job I do love. List the areas of your job that you like: List the areas of your job that you do not like: For each of the areas that you don’t like, use the chart below to consider how to manage those tasks. TASK: _____________ CAN THIS TASK BE ELIMINATED OR SIMPLIFIED?: YES OR NO CAN I ASK FOR HELP?: YES OR NO CAN I DELEGATE THIS?: YES OR NO IS THERE AN EASIER WAY TO COMPLETE THIS TASK?: YES OR NO WHAT’S THE EASIEST SOLUTION?: IS IT POSSIBLE TO PAIR THIS TASK WITH SOMETHING I ENJOY? (EXAMPLE: LISTENING TO MUSIC WHILE COMPLETING MONTHLY REPORTS): Reframe the Way You View the Situation Reframing is a technique that allows you to shift your mindset from something negative to something positive and, therefore, more helpful. It helps you put things into perspective when you can’t change a situation. Example: My boss will never let me have the time off I requested. Reframe: The company has a policy that allows me to take time off as long as I request it in advance. Using the space below, practice reframing some of your “always” and “never” thoughts about work. Handling a Toxic Work Environment You can’t choose your coworkers, but you can choose how you respond to them. For example, how can you handle the following workplace situations? When people are gossiping in the office, I can: When it’s requested that I work long hours, I can: When cliques are formed at work, I can: When I’m assigned more work on top of my already overwhelming workload, I can: When I have issues with my boss, I can: When I have issues with my coworker, I can: If I experience sexual harassment, bullying, or mistreatment based on race, physical ability, or sexual orientation, I can: Pause: Take a moment to pause and reflect on the times when you’ve felt happy at work. What was happening during those times? Hire Well You can’t change people, but you can change yourself. If you’re in the position to hire people, make sure that you hire those who are capable of doing the job. Sometimes you hire people because they’re nice, because they were recommended, or because you may simply like them. But it’s important that they’re able to complete their job duties. I’ve made the following mistakes when hiring people: If you’ve made mistakes in the past, commit to do better next time. Don’t merely hope that things will turn out differently if you make the same mistake again. How to Set Boundaries at Work 1. Identify the areas where boundaries are needed with ______________. You can uncover these by tuning in to your feelings. For example, if you are staying later than you’d like, what’s causing this behavior on your part? What about your job leads you to feel overwhelmed or burned out? 2. If at all possible, do your work only during work hours. Particularly when working from home, try to stick to your work and avoid distractions. If you need to do something personal, take a planned break away for a set amount of time. 3. Give yourself permission to create boundaries in all areas of your life, including work. If you hold back from expressing what you need, you will feel resentment toward your coworkers and employer. 4. Don’t let issues go too far before you decide to set boundaries. Start setting them right at the onset of the problem. 5. Teach others how to respect your boundaries by being consistent about respecting them yourself. If you choose to declare your expectations, be clear and up-front. Setting Boundaries with Your Boss Sometimes, bosses have personalities that don’t make it easy to set boundaries. Also, you may not know how to clearly articulate your needs. And of course, there’s a fear of coming off as rude and causing damage to your relationship with your boss. Let’s practice language around setting boundaries with your boss. Remember to be clear, concise, and consistent. Examples: “I need help with my workload because I can’t manage everything on my plate.” “I don’t feel comfortable talking about politics at work.” Write three of your own using the space below: 1. 2. 3. Managing Burnout Burnout is the result of doing too much, feeling underappreciated, having unreasonable expectations, or participating in activities that provide you with little value. Certain unpleasant tasks or interactions may be a part of the job, but in some cases, burnout can be prevented. I do more than required in the following areas: I feel underappreciated when: I set the following unreasonable expectations: I receive little value from the following: To prevent myself from getting burned out, I can: If I’m having a challenging day at work, I can: Off-Hours Sometimes you disrespect your own boundaries by working during off-hours or while on vacation. When you feel the need to work after hours, ask yourself, “Is this urgent?” There’s a difference between urgent, important, and work that can wait. Describe the difference between these three areas. What’s urgent? What’s important? What can wait? The Art of Unplugging There’s always work to be done. Know when to leave tasks for the next day. What do you enjoy doing with your time outside of work? What hobbies would you like to explore? What activities make you feel most like yourself? How do you want to be remembered? Gather Yourself What if we stopped celebrating being busy as a measurement of importance? What if instead we celebrated how much time we had spent listening, pondering, meditating, and enjoying time with the most important people in our lives? —Greg McKeown What came up for you while going through this chapter?