14 Social Media and Technology Because we live in a digital world, technology is a massive part of how we function. Even with technology all around us, we can curate a healthy digital experience. ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL MEDIA BOUNDARIES Using the checklist below, mark each area where you struggle with healthy boundaries. You find yourself constantly checking your phone when you’re supposed to focus on something else. You spend excessive amounts of time on your phone. The average person spends about three hours a day on their phone. In social settings, you’re glued to your phone instead of socializing. You regularly use your phone as an escape from working, parenting, completing tasks, or being present with others. People have complained about your digital usage. You use your phone while driving. Your technology usage impacts your ability to function in other areas, such as in school, at work, or at home. Your technology usage hurts your mental or emotional health. The positive attention that many people receive keeps them posting and wanting more. It’s true that social media can be hard to break away from. With each like and view, your brain receives a hit of dopamine that keeps you wanting more. And sometimes, to receive the admiration that some find on social media, you may find yourself becoming a different version of yourself. What do you portray on social media? What might people assume about you based solely on what you post and share? When you see something on social media that causes you discomfort, what can you say to reassure yourself? Is there an action that you need to take to ease your discomfort? If so, what is that action? The Good and Bad of Technology I cannot imagine a world without TV. As a child, I slept with a TV in my bedroom, and through most of college I continued this practice. It wasn’t until my TV broke during my senior year of undergraduate that I considered watching less TV. By necessity, at least for a few weeks, I lived without a TV. Not only did I survive, but I broke my habit of sleeping with the television in my bedroom. I found my sleep to be more restful without it, and I no longer spent time lingering in bed when I needed to get my day started. Watching television is still one of my favorite pastimes. However, I’m more intentional with when and what I watch. What are some good aspects of technology? Example: Being able to FaceTime parents who live in another state. What are some bad aspects of technology? Example: Seeing your friends having fun without you on social media. Social Media Isn’t the Only Cure for Boredom Oftentimes, scrolling on social media is done out of boredom. Make a list of things that you’d rather do than use social media. Your Energy Is a Reflection of What You Consume Have you ever been feeling fine and then you happen upon something that completely changed your mood? Whether it’s watching the news or who you follow on social media, you can determine what is and isn’t working and make changes as needed. Who or what types of accounts do you enjoy following on social media? Who or what accounts cause your mood to shift in a negative way? Pause: Take a moment to remember when social media wasn’t a daily part of your life. Fear of Missing Out (FOMO) You will not be included in everything. And you will not include everyone in every aspect of your life. It makes sense that we can feel upset when excluded from gatherings and other experiences we see on social media. When you are feeling left out, what can you say to reassure yourself? 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Reasons to unfollow people on social media: They post too often (for your liking). You feel annoyed, frustrated, or angry by their posts. Their posts aren’t relevant to you. You find yourself complaining about their content. You often feel inferior (not enough). The content is not consistent with who you are. You don’t like what they represent. You find yourself comparing your life with the lives of the people you follow. Strategies to Minimize Digital Overload Social Media Cleanse There are two ways to do a digital cleanse. Option 1 Restrict yourself from using social media by removing yourself from it completely for a certain amount of time. What length of time will I commit to not using social media? What habits do I need to change to honor my commitment? Example: Remove the app from your phone. How will I ease my way back into social media? How do I want to use social media differently long-term? Option 2 Manage the way you show up. In this exercise, I want you to go through the list of people you follow. For each account, consider how you feel connected or disconnected from their content. If you feel disconnected, exercise your power to mute or unfollow. How much time do you want to spend on social media? How much time do you want to spend on other areas of technology such as watching TV or the news? Are there certain times of the day that you want to spend technology-free? If so, when or during what activities? Could removing some apps from your phone be helpful? If so, which apps? Gather Yourself What came up for you while going through this chapter?