4 Managing the Discomfort of Setting Boundaries How You Respond to Your Boundaries In 2020, Meghan Markle and Prince Harry announced they were leaving the royal family to create a different life for themselves. One year later, they were interviewed by Oprah Winfrey. In the interview, they discussed the chain of events leading to their separation from the royal family. After watching the interview, I posted this on Instagram: Let’s allow Meghan Markle and Prince Harry to be shining examples of honoring our boundaries. Deciding to invent a life of your own may be different from what your family planned for you. Choosing to exist differently can change your relationships. When you execute your boundaries, some people will not be pleased. However, making decisions for yourself is brave and healthy. People cannot determine what’s best for you. It’s okay if what worked for others doesn’t work for you. You can be kind and set boundaries. Don’t let trying to be nice stop you from doing the hard work of setting limits with others. One of the most significant issues people have with boundaries is the discomfort associated with the process before, while, and after executing them. In this chapter, we will talk about managing your feelings. It’s Okay and Normal to Feel They don’t tell you in grad school that a considerable chunk of your time as a therapist will be spent telling clients, “It’s okay to feel,” and “What you’re feeling is normal.” I do this so often that after a while, my clients share how they feel and say, “I know what you’re going to say: ‘It’s normal.’ ” Feelings are not bad, but some are uncomfortable. We love to feel happy, excited, and overjoyed. But the moment we feel jealous, guilty, or frustrated, we want to stop the ability to feel. The neuroscientist Dr. Jill Taylor found that the typical emotion lasts about ninety seconds. According to Bryn Farnsworth, Ph.D., while emotions are associated with bodily reactions that are activated through neurotransmitters and hormones released by the brain, feelings are the conscious experience of emotional reactions. With negative feelings, we tend to hang on for a very long time. Sometimes, we can be upset for an entire day or even a few days. But what we forget is that while upset, we likely experience other feelings simultaneously. We can feel more than one thing at the same time, but when we focus on the negative feeling, it seems as though it’s all we’re feeling. This is not setting a boundary; it ’ s controlling someone: Pushing someone to think and be like you Managing areas of someone’s life that have no impact on you (i.e., not minding your own business) Determining what another person can or can’t do with their life Demanding that people change for you Manipulating people into changing their behavior Creating rules for how others “should” do things in their life Telling people what’s best for them EXERCISE To help illustrate the ability to have more than one feeling at a time, I will present a scenario, and I want you to describe at least two feelings about it. Then you will create your own scenarios. As you’re completing this exercise, please keep in mind that feelings are one word, such as “angry,” “sad,” or “confused.” If you describe something in more detail, such as “I want to tell them to stop,” chances are you’re representing a thought or behavioral response. For this exercise, list only your feelings. 1. A friend asks you to join her for a movie night. Since you haven’t seen her in a while, you agree. Just before leaving your house, your friend texts to cancel your plans. Name two initial feelings that come to mind when your friend cancels. 2. Create your own scenario, and name two or more feelings. 3. Create your own scenario, and name two or more feelings. Guilt-Free Boundaries “How do I set boundaries without feeling guilty?” My immediate thought is, “You can’t.” I know, I know—I’m a therapist; there must be something I can do to make boundaries guilt-free. I wish with all my therapist power that I could remove the guilt associated with setting boundaries, but I can’t. There are reasons we feel guilty: 1. We’ve done something wrong. 2. We think we’re doing something wrong. Because so many of us are programmed to believe that setting boundaries is mean or selfish, we feel guilty for placing expectations on our relationships with others. But we are entitled to healthy boundaries in our relationships. Guilt is sometimes used as a control tactic in relationships to keep us compliant or make us feel bad for having needs. Other uncomfortable feelings include shame, jealousy, frustration, and anger. Important Reminder: Sometimes when people don’t want to adhere to your boundaries, they will make you seem irrational for having them. Instead of questioning yourself, accept that some people will make you feel like a difficult person for wanting healthy things for yourself no matter how logical your limits and expectations are. Your work is to determine how you wish to handle relationships with people who make healthy boundaries seem absurd. EXERCISE Feelings are an emotional state of being. It’s essential to know how to connect your life experiences to your feelings, so in this exercise, I want you to practice naming uncomfortable feelings. When was the last time you felt lonely? What’s the last situation that led to your feeling hurt? What feeling do you feel most often? What feeling is the most difficult for you to feel? What feeling do you talk about most often? Overwhelmed: doing more than you feel capable of doing, without enough perceived help Describe a time when you felt overwhelmed. Frustrated: distress and annoyance, mainly because of an inability to change or achieve something Describe a time when you felt frustrated. Embarrassed: shame or uncomfortable self-consciousness Describe a time when you felt embarrassed. Jealous: feeling envy toward someone or their achievements and advantages Describe a time when you felt jealous. Anxious: worried, uneasy, or nervous, typically about an imminent event or something with an uncertain outcome. Describe a time when you felt anxious. Living with Feelings, Instead of Trying to Get Rid of Them Sometimes, the only thing we can do about our feelings is allow them to flow, and sometimes, the only thing we can do is manage them. Your job is to figure out what you need. When you’re feeling uncomfortable, consider what you can do to manage the discomfort. For example, call a friend to help you. Uncomfortable Feelings May Arise from Setting Boundaries Depending on your relationship with the other person, your connection to the situation, and how long you’ve gone without setting a boundary, you may experience discomfort (guilt, sadness, betrayal, or remorse). Guilt When you feel bad about making healthy choices for yourself, guilt may be a part of the process. The more comfortable you start to feel with setting boundaries, the less guilt you’ll experience. Keep practicing as a way to reduce your guilt. Repeat After Me: “Guilt is a symptom of believing that I did something wrong. It’s possible to feel guilty even when I am doing something right. If I have not done anything to harm another person, my guilt is not appropriate or helpful. I am not responsible for everything that someone else feels. I am responsible for honoring my needs, and sometimes that means that others will not be able to get their way.” Sadness Because you don’t want to hurt anyone’s feelings, you may feel sad about executing a boundary. Even when you don’t know how someone else feels, you may feel sad at the thought of making someone else feel sad. It’s healthy to be empathetic, and your feelings are a sign that you care about others. Betrayal Setting limits with others does not mean that you don’t love them. Consider boundaries as a way to keep your relationships healthy while honoring yourself and the other person. You aren’t doing anything to harm them or the relationship. Your intention is to keep the relationship strong. Remorse Don’t betray yourself to please others by saying something like, “Did I say that? Oh my gosh, that came out wrong.” It’s natural to feel like you didn’t do the right thing after you set a boundary. But it isn’t wrong or bad to set them. Reframe the way you think about boundaries, and that mental shift will help you minimize discomfort. JOURNAL PROMPT How would implementing or reshaping your boundaries positively change your relationships with the significant people in your life? How Others Respond to Your Boundaries Emotional Maturity Emotional maturity impacts a person’s ability to receive, understand, and implement boundaries. People have a right to a reaction, but it’s inappropriate when their reaction causes harm to another person. When you express an expectation, some people will indeed not like it. Know that their reaction is a reflection of their emotional maturity and experience. Chronological age is not an indicator of someone’s maturity. Life experiences, knowledge, and comprehension are all factors that influence it. For example, suppose you’ve done the work of learning about yourself, and you’re speaking to someone unfamiliar with the process of self-reflection. In that case, they may not understand your perspective. It’s essential to remember that someone’s experiences and understanding may impact how they perceive your boundaries. Handling an Unhealthy Reaction to Your Boundaries Step 1 Restate your boundary. I need ______________. Step 2 Communicate a consequence if your boundary is not respected. If you aren’t able to do ______________, I will ______________. Important Reminder: Do not set a limit that you can’t maintain. The consequence of not respecting your boundary needs to be something you can follow through with. For example, “I need you to ask me a few days in advance to babysit. If you ask me the day you need me, it’s possible I won’t be available.” Step 3 Manage your discomfort by referring to the “When I’m Upset I Can...” diagram you created earlier in this chapter. Important Reminder: Sometimes, the very people shaming you for making choices without their input, taking care of yourself, and standing firm in your boundaries are the same people who need to practice trusting themselves, taking care of themselves, and having healthy boundaries of their own. Because it’s hard for them, they may try to make it hard for you. When you know the other person struggles to stand in their power, perhaps their pushing back is a sign that you’re on the right track. Gather Yourself In this chapter, we talked about discomfort. Think about what or who contributes to your feelings of discomfort around setting boundaries. Write about them below: