7 Getting Better at Communicating Your Boundaries In some relationships, we function with unhealthy behaviors for years. With unhealthy boundaries well established, many of us are unsure how to shift once we become aware of the need for change. You Don’t Have to Remain the Same When You Know Better A hallmark of wisdom is knowing when it’s time to abandon some of your most treasured tools—and some of the most cherished parts of your identity. —Adam Grant One of my favorite phrases is “until today,” which is also the title of a book by Iyanla Vanzant. In my life, I interpret it as meaning that even though I may have accepted something or engaged in certain habits for years, I can choose to stop now. There is no rule saying that we have to stay the same just because people expect us to never change. Throughout life, we go through so many changes. From childhood to adulthood, we experience countless shifts in interests and needs and how we respond when they’re not being met. It makes sense, because we are never finished evolving. Important Reminder: Some of the people you have problematic relationships with will never change. When you accept people as they are, you can consciously decide if you want to continue in the relationship. If you aren’t ready to leave a relationship, being aware of who others are will help you determine how you show up in the relationship. You have choices. You can be different, even if they won’t change. SELF-ASSESSMENT Are you prepared to set new boundaries in your existing relationships? Where are you currently functioning? Rate the statements below on a scale of 1 to 5 to describe where you are in your boundary journey. At the end, add up your total score. 1 = rarely 2 = occasionally 3 = frequently 4 = most of the time 5 = always 1. I believe that healthy boundaries are important for relationships. 1 2 3 4 5 2. I believe that I am entitled to have healthy boundaries in my relationships. 1 2 3 4 5 3. I believe that others are entitled to have healthy boundaries with me. 1 2 3 4 5 4. I’m comfortable communicating my limits and expectations to others. 1 2 3 4 5 5. Worrying how others might respond impacts my ability to set healthy boundaries. 1 2 3 4 5 6. I feel comfortable restating my boundaries to others. 1 2 3 4 5 7. I can choose to act in my best interests. 1 2 3 4 5 8. People are aware of my needs. 1 2 3 4 5 9. When my needs change, I communicate them. 1 2 3 4 5 10. I feel comfortable asking for support. 1 2 3 4 5 Scoring 41–50: You are healthy and secure in your practice and adhere to healthy boundaries. Refreshing or restating your boundaries isn’t usually a challenge for you. Keep up the good therapeutic work. 31–40: You’re doing a good job. Continue to improve on the skills you have. 21–30: The application of this work is challenging to maintain. Sometimes you do a good job, and other times you slack on the principles. Practice being more consistent and becoming more confident in your boundaries. 11–20: You struggle to understand and implement boundaries. Keep working through the exercises in this book, revisiting them as needed. 0–10: Focus on gaining more foundational skills, such as building boundaries, understanding the importance of having healthy expectations, and learning how to communicate your needs. Your journey has just begun. Correcting Boundary Mishaps Implementing Too Many New Things at Once Learning new information can make us excited to share what we’ve learned and put it into practice. Often, we have so many new expectations that we attempt to share them all at once. But if you express too many of your needs at the same time, the other person will be unlikely to be receptive. Stating the Problem Without Sharing the Solution Instead of stating the boundary, perhaps you shared your issues. That’s a step toward something, but it probably isn’t clear enough to either express what you need or to actually say no. Being Aggressive Perhaps you yelled, screamed, cursed, or berated someone because you wanted to be heard. Aggressiveness makes a bigger problem than the problem you’re trying to solve. Being Inconsistent The key to getting people to respect your boundaries is consistency. When you are inconsistent in upholding your limits and expectations, people will be inconsistent in honoring them. EXERCISE In this exercise, identify a few scenarios when you experienced a boundary mishap. 1. Mishap: Outcome following the mishap: Corrective action: 2. Mishap: Outcome following the mishap: Corrective action: 3. Mishap: Outcome following the mishap: Corrective action: Shifting Gears If you allow your boundaries to be violated because you’re afraid or uncomfortable, you will continue suffering. When you’re ready to implement new boundaries, do so slowly. Start slow and address one item at a time. It’s often helpful to start with the issue that troubles you most. Prioritize the important boundaries first, and once you’ve been successful with one, move on to the next. Let’s take a look at some critical boundary areas. Think of something that has been allowed to occur for a long time, and decide what boundary you’d like to set to change the situation. Remember to start your statement with “ I want,” “ I need,” “ I expect,” or “ I will say no to...” Romantic relationships Friendships Work/School Family relationships Social media Refresh Your Boundaries as Needed We don’t stay the same, and neither do our needs in relationships. As you change and become more self-aware, it makes sense that what you need or don’t want will change. In 2020, the world experienced an unprecedented shift caused by COVID-19. Many people had to adjust their boundaries and expectations during that time. Home became the hub for work, school, exercise, and so much more. And if you shared space with others, accommodating everyone was an additional stressor. Restructuring boundaries in the pandemic is how many people were able to survive. The Three Cs Clear Concise Consistent To ensure that you’re setting effective boundaries, ask yourself these questions: 1. Was my boundary clear? Were they paying attention? Did I state what I needed, say no, or set a limit? 2. Was the boundary concise? Did I overexplain myself or use complicated language? 3. Did I follow through on the boundary? How am I upholding my boundary? Pause: COVID-19 was shocking and impactful. Take a few moments to be mindful before moving on to the next exercise, which addresses the impact of the pandemic on our relationships and ourselves. EXERCISE: COVID-19 CHANGED THE WAY WE VIEWED THE WORLD How did the pandemic impact you most? Did the pandemic change your relationship with others? If so, how? What were some new limits you set with yourself or others during this time? What difficult conversations did you have with others? Are there lasting changes you want to implement going forward? You Can Clean Up Your Mess Perhaps you missed the opportunity to speak up in a specific circumstance, or you said too much. There’s still time to be more efficient. I encourage you to use what we have talked about thus far, go back loaded with new information, and set new boundaries. You may not always get it right, but thank goodness there’s a next time. Clean up the mess you may have made, and apologize if necessary. You didn’t know what you didn’t know. Practice what you’ve learned going forward, and don’t be afraid to go back and fix things. Gather Yourself Repeat the following affirmation: “I may not always get it right, because being human doesn’t require being perfect.” What came up for you while going through this chapter?