When you get distracted with other people’s stuff, you take time away from yourself. When you spend time that you don’t have to spare, you take time away from your goals. Saying yes to yourself may look like Foregoing an extra hour of television when you know you need to get up early Staying hydrated Saying no to invitations you don’t wish to honor Adhering to a monthly budget Taking regular breaks and not working yourself to the bone Going on affordable vacations Allowing yourself to feel your feelings without judging them as good or bad Setting a “do not disturb” on your phone after 8:00 p.m. Taking care of your physical health by going to the doctor and taking medication as prescribed Taking care of your mental health by going to therapy Resting when your body needs it Reading for pleasure, not with the intent to learn or grow a new skill Finding healthy ways to manage your emotions Maintaining good financial habits like paying bills on time and not racking up debt from buying things you don’t need or things that can wait until you can truly afford them Keeping Your Word to Yourself Setting limits with yourself is a conscious act that will make your life easier. Rules seem restrictive, but when you create them, you can include nuance. Therefore, having boundaries with yourself is not a restriction. Instead, they help you achieve your goal, build healthy relationships, and live according to your values. When you don’t keep your word to yourself, you are engaging in self-sabotage, self- betrayal, or people-pleasing. Self-sabotage Procrastinating Getting close to a goal and quitting Staying in relationships that are unhealthy Not keeping your word to yourself Setting unrealistic goals Not trying Carrying a negative narrative (story) about yourself and your abilities Self-sabotage is just one way that we dishonor our boundaries with ourselves. It involves engaging in unhealthy behaviors that keep us from what we say we want. Self-sabotage first starts in the way we talk to ourselves. For example, we often talk ourselves out of trying before we even start. Once we start to talk to ourselves negatively, we commit to those negative thoughts as truth. We may say, “I can’t,” but we’re capable of accomplishing more than we believe we can do. The “I can’t” narrative leads to procrastination, not trying, quitting, setting unrealistic goals, and/or negative self-talk. So in the story you tell about yourself, incorporate an “I can” narrative. Don’t quit before you start. Here are some examples of what not to say: “I’m going to try to stop drinking for thirty days.” “I’ll see how long I can stick to drinking more water.” “I’ll share my boundary with them, but I’m one hundred percent sure they won’t listen.” In other words, use direct language without ambivalence about what will happen. Here are assertive examples of self-boundary statements: “I’m going to quit drinking for thirty days.” “I can change my habits.” “I’m drinking more water, starting today.” “I’m capable of following through.” “Please respect my boundaries.” Confidence in your boundaries is the cure for self-sabotage. Self-betrayal Changing who you are and what you believe in order to stay in relationships with others Pretending to be someone other than who you really are Comparing yourself with others (friends, family, strangers on the internet, a past version of yourself) Failing to consistently maintain your values Making negative statements about yourself to others or in your head With self-betrayal, we dishonor ourselves by failing to live according to our values or failing to show up as an authentic human being. Guilt then sets in, because we know deep down that we’re acting inauthentically. In healthy relationships, it’s acceptable for you to be yourself. People-Pleasing People-pleasing is making others happy at the cost of our own happiness. It happens because we want to be accepted by others. Those of us who are people-pleasers assume that others won’t like it when we advocate for what we want. Therefore, we pretend to go along in an effort to be accepted by others. But healthy people appreciate honesty and don’t abandon us if we say no. For example, Charlotte asked me, “Is it okay for me to tell people to stop asking me when I’m getting married?” Yes! Her life isn’t an open book. She doesn’t have to answer any question that makes her feel uncomfortable. It’s okay to create boundaries about what you share with others. For example, you don’t have to share any of the following: Why you aren’t married yet Your relationship status When you’re having a baby If you already have kids, when you’re having more kids What’s next in your life How you spend your time How much money you make How you spend your money Your lifestyle Your weight (loss or gain) Insert your own example here: ____________ Insert another one here: ____________ You get to decide what you feel comfortable sharing as well as which people you wish to tell your personal business to. On Instagram, I’m often asked deeply personal questions, and when I don’t want to answer them, I have the privilege of ignoring them. If you don’t want to answer a question, consider doing this: Respond with a question: “That’s an interesting question; what prompted you to ask me that?” Turn the question back on them: “Do you want more kids?” Change the topic by glossing over the question: “Money is always such an interesting topic. What are you watching on Netflix?” Be direct: “I don’t feel comfortable answering that question.” Make your boundaries clear: “I don’t like it when people talk to me about weight.” Remember, you have a choice about what conversations you are willing to have with others. The Power of Refreshing and Restating Your Boundaries Refreshing As humans, we change, and our boundaries change with us. It’s okay if your tolerance for certain things in your relationship changes. You can create new expectations. When this happens, you can say, “____ is no longer working for me; I would like ____.” You can also ease up on the boundaries you previously set. For example, if you decide you won’t stay at work past 6:00 p.m., you can stay longer on occasion if you wish. Consider this: What has prompted me to shift my boundaries? Is this a temporary or permanent shift? How will shifting my boundary impact my goals for myself? Will changing my boundary continue to honor who I am in my relationships? Restating Over time, people may assume that your boundaries with them have expired. Remind them (as well as yourself) about your expectations, including why they were set. Know that the changes you see in the other person are a direct result of your boundaries in the relationship. If, over time, you find yourself reneging on the limits you set, remember how they positively impacted your life. Recommit to them, and proceed with honoring them. You can’t change people, but you can change How you deal with them What you accept How you react to them How often you interact with them How much space you allow them to take up What you participate in What role they play in your life What people you have contact with Who you allow in your life Your perspective Consistency Is Key From time to time, you may not honor your boundaries. But when you find yourself in a rut, get out. I know that sounds easier said than done, but remember that you don’t have to commit to staying down. The moment that you begin to notice that you aren’t honoring your boundaries, get right back to keeping your word to yourself. If you’ve labeled yourself as a person who can’t stick to things, you will be “a person who can’t stick to things.” So change the narrative of who you’ve told yourself you are by removing the negative connotations. Instead, say, “I’m a person who sticks to things.” The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person who is this. —J     C    , A      H      Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. What type of person do you want to be? Become who you want to be, and introduce that version of yourself to the rest of the world. Create a list of boundaries you’d like to implement for yourself. For example, “Save more money.” Next to each one, identify one actionable step to help you uphold your boundary. Example: “Start a savings account, and add $30 per month to it.” PART 2 This Is How You Do the Work of Setting Boundaries 10 Family Tough love is you creating and keeping healthy boundaries. James was tired of being in the middle of disputes between his mother, Debra, and his wife, Tiffany. All he wanted was for the two of them to get along. Tiffany was always complaining about his mother, and his mother was always complaining to him about how she felt hurt by Tiffany. James tried to manage both of them by listening but not picking a side. Tiffany hated that James wouldn’t put his mother in her place. He allowed his mother to act like a partner in their marriage. Every decision the couple made was run past Debra first. James did a horrible job of hiding the fact that his mother’s advice persuaded his opinion. He adored her, and from his point of view, Debra was smart, successful, reliable, and offered great advice. Tiffany, on the other hand, saw Debra as manipulative, overbearing, and passive- aggressive. Tiffany had always dreamed of having a mother-in-law who would be like a second mother to her. But from the first moment she met Debra, seven months into dating James, Debra made it clear that she was the leading lady in her son’s life. James looked to his mother to help pay for their wedding and the down payment on their house, and he asked for her input on many big and small financial decisions. In their five years of marriage and two years of dating, Tiffany tried to deal with Debra by asking James to handle it, but he never put his foot down. His mother always got whatever she wanted. Tiffany was starting to resent her husband for not standing up to his mom. As a result of that resentment, she began to withdraw, missing family events and retreating to her room when Debra dropped by. Now that James and Tiffany were thinking of starting a family, she wanted her husband to finally begin setting boundaries with his mother. Eventually, Tiffany and James decided to seek therapy to discuss how Debra was impacting their marriage. The first few sessions were intense, as Tiffany presented issues from the past with Debra, and James defended his mother’s honor. At the third session, I made the declaration, “Perhaps we should focus on just the needs of the two people present.” That declaration helped us most of the time, but occasionally Debra still entered the room as a third but invisible force. When this happened, I encouraged James and Tiffany to consider the impact of a person who was not physically present but always emotionally present in the marriage. They noted that most of their disputes were due to Debra, not to anything they were doing directly to each other. In our time together, we spoke about the importance of maintaining the integrity of the relationship by not oversharing with others. The couple created boundaries around what topics they’d like to keep between themselves, when they’d like to share certain information with others, and how they would talk about their marriage to other people. At first, this was hard for James, because he was used to sharing everything with his mother. In the beginning, he gave in to Debra as she demanded more information in order to push her agenda. She seemed to know exactly what to say to get James to comply. After a few slip-ups, he started to prepare himself for his mother’s tactics. Over time, he became firm in his expectations. While James was learning to implement boundaries consistently, I worked with Tiffany on using motivating language to support her husband as he shifted his relationship with his mother. He struggled with establishing himself as an adult with Debra. She had drilled into him that she knew best and wanted the best for him, and he feared that setting boundaries would push her away. He hadn’t considered that he could set them with his mother while maintaining their closeness and simultaneously alleviating the issues in his marriage and the wedge between Tiffany and Debra. His mother wanted the best for James, but perhaps the best for him was having boundaries with her. You Become an Adult When You Set Boundaries with Your Parents Adult children are adults over the age of eighteen. Even if you live with your parents after that, you’re legally an adult, and their access to your life shifts. You may, of course, have to adhere to your parents’ boundaries if you’re living in their household, but you can still set some of your own, even if on a smaller scale. An essential part of becoming an adult is becoming your own guide. As you feel more comfortable being an adult, you start to lean further away from being ruled by your parents. In some cases, your parents might suggest that setting boundaries is disrespectful. But it isn’t disrespectful when done with care. If you’re afraid of disrespecting your parents, you might feel better sharing why the boundary is important to you. How do you stand up to the most influential force in your life? How do you change your relationship from that of a child to that of an adult child? For your entire life, your parents have been acquainted with you inside and out. They know what to say to trigger you and get what they want. You may understand what your parents desire merely by reading their body language or noticing a shift in their mood. Most people don’t want to disappoint their parents. When I was a kid, the worst thing I ever heard from my mother was “I’m disappointed.” That statement broke my heart and ensured that I would behave for at least the next two hours. Yet when you don’t set boundaries with your parents, you are the one who becomes disappointed, resentful, and anxious. At some point, it’s healthy for all adults to ask themselves, “What do I want?” Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Parents Your parents are aware of intimate details of your relationship (particularly if they’re causing harm in the relationship). Your parents are involved with disputes you have with others. Your parents don’t respect your opinion. Your parents enter your personal space without asking. Your parents insist that you say yes to everything. You say yes to your parents out of obligation even when it’s inconvenient. Boundaries with your parents look like Expressing your feelings openly Managing your time in a way that works best for your schedule and lifestyle Not pressing yourself to attend every family event Giving them rules about your home Not allowing them to show up at your home unannounced Withholding intimate details of your relationship Not painting your partner in a negative light to your parents Saying no Introducing your partner to your parents when you’re ready Handling your own disputes with others Sharing your opinion with your parents Being transparent with your parents about your expectations of how they can engage with your partner Saying no to gifts that are given with the hope of specific behavior from you Telling your parents that you don’t want to be asked about your dating life, having kids, getting married, or any other topic that makes you feel uncomfortable Staying in a hotel instead of staying with family when you visit them Boundaries with your parents sound like “I’m dating someone new. When you meet them, don’t ask them when and if we’re getting married.” “I won’t be home for Christmas because I’ve decided to celebrate with my friends.” “Before you stop by to visit, I’d like you to call.” “I’d like to express my feelings without being told that certain emotions aren’t okay.” “I know that you mean well and want the best for me, but I need to handle things in my relationship without your input.” “I won’t accept money from you if it comes with the intention that I do something to earn that money or that you will talk about my borrowing money.” “I understand how important it is to you that I remain connected to my family, but I need to have my own ideas about how to maintain connections without your input.” “When I have issues with my sister, I don’t want you to get in the middle by referring to the dispute. We are adults and can resolve our differences without your guidance.” “It makes me feel uncomfortable to hear you talk about your relationship with Mom. Please find someone else to confide in.” “I’m vegetarian, and I’d like you to keep that in mind when you prepare meals for family gatherings.” Important Reminders It’s normal and healthy for you to have boundaries in your relationships with people. (Remember that your parents are people.) Share your boundaries as soon as you notice that you need them. Doing so will prevent unwanted reactions that may occur after you’ve let things go on for too long. Setting them with your parents is new for them and for you. If there is resistance, they’re likely just adjusting to this new phase in your relationship. Be clear and consistent when you execute your boundaries. It’s true that you will always be your parents’ child. However, you evolve into an adult with your own way of existing in the world. Boundaries Around the Holidays At some point in your adult life, you may decide to change your holiday traditions. Perhaps you want to celebrate at home alone, travel, or celebrate with your partner’s family, etc. To establish your plans for how you want to celebrate the holiday, start early. Waiting until the last minute by putting it off may feel better to you, but letting your family know at the last minute that you’re veering from the original plans might cause more issues in the family. Boundaries around the holidays may look like Asking your family to stay in a hotel Staying in a hotel when you visit your family Taking some space and time to be alone if you’re staying with family Creating new traditions Buying fewer gifts or sticking to a budget Not including people who make your holiday experience uncomfortable Changing the subject when heated topics are mentioned Boundaries with Your In-Laws If you’re in a committed relationship (with or without children), it isn’t uncommon for in-laws to cause stress between you and your partner. I mentioned to a client once that my mother-in-law was coming to visit, and my client asked, “Do you like her?” Of all the in- law relationships, mothers-in-law are notorious for being relationship disruptors. In-laws disrupt the relationship when the adult child hasn’t set boundaries with their parents. As a result, spouses are often left carrying the load of setting limits. The questions I’m asked most is “How do you set boundaries with someone else’s parents?” In the book Babyproofing Your Marriage: How to Laugh More and Argue Less as Your Family Grows, authors Stacie Cockrell, Cathy O’Neill, and Julia Stone advocate for sharing your issues with your partner, mutually deciding on a course of action, and allowing your partner to execute the boundaries. Essentially, you set boundaries with your family, and your partner sets boundaries with their family. This option works well if your partner agrees with the issues you present and feels brave in doing so