Household Who is responsible for doing which task? How will tasks be divided so that they don’t fall on one person? How can you work together to meet the needs of your home? Kids Do you want kids? How many kids do you want? What is your parenting style, or what do you think it will be? How will you approach disagreements related to kids? How will you maintain your relationship with your partner once children arrive? Outside Forces How do you handle issues with your partner’s family? What happens when you disagree with how your partner handled an issue? Is it okay to talk about your relationship with people outside the relationship? If so, whom? How do you protect your relationship from others? Not only is it important to Having communicate more, but it’s also uncomfortable important what you communicate conversations about. Having uncomfortable conversations can save relationships. So can save be willing to talk about issues before relationships. they become a problem. Preventing the common communication mishaps above will save you from arguments in the future. Assertiveness Minimizes Miscommunication and Recurring Arguments Speaking up is hard, especially if your underlying belief is They won’t care. They won’t honor my request. They won’t take me seriously. They won’t understand me. It won’t help anything. I don’t want to be mean. In healthy relationships, communicating your needs is welcomed and respected. In unhealthy relationships, people ignore you, push back, or even challenge your boundaries. We’ve already explored what to do if your relationship isn’t healthy. So let’s assume that your lack of assertiveness is based on fear. In my sessions with couples, I’ve been surprised how much they hold back from each other because they fear what the other person might say. Janice and Sarah sought therapy because Janice wanted more sex. When I asked the couple, “How often would you like to have sex?” they both said the same thing: “Two to three times a week.” This happens so often. Why? Because instead of finding a solution, most couples quarrel about the problem. Instead of stating, “I’d like to have sex two to three times a week,” then following that statement up with initiating sex, most couples resort to arguing. “We never have sex,” they say. Being assertive sets an expectation for your partner. You’re no longer simply reacting to every problem; you’re proactive about the issues in your relationship. When you’re faced with a challenge in your relationship, ask yourself: 1. What is the real problem? 2. What is my need? 3. How do I need to communicate with my partner? 4. What can I do to ensure that my need is met? 5. What do I want from my partner to meet my needs? Creating an Environment for Open Communication Open communication is a way of holding space to address issues that impact the health of your relationship or the people within it. But open communication doesn’t mean that you can be mean or vent to your partner about everything you dislike. For example, you can’t say things like “I hate your mother” and consider that “open.” However, you might say, “I’d like to improve my relationship with your mother because I notice it’s strained. Do you have any suggestions on how to do that?” It’s helpful, of course, to establish healthy communication in the beginning, but if you’re already in a relationship, it’s essential to talk about it now. Open communication works best when done proactively before a small issue becomes a big problem. Little things can easily add up, so address issues even when you believe them to be “not that big of a deal.” You’ll be surprised at the “little things” that later come up as major issues, such as “He takes his shoes off and leaves them right in the middle of the floor.” “She never asks what I want for dinner.” “He never takes my car to the shop. I have to do everything.” Telling your partner what you need allows them to honor your boundary. Staying quiet will piss you off. Here are some examples and solutions for common boundary violations in romantic relationships: “I hate my mother-in-law. My husband won’t stand up to her. What can I do?” It may be hard to watch your husband be taken advantage of by his mother. However, they’ve likely had this dynamic his entire life. You can’t make people aware of what they can’t see. You might be able to get your husband to talk more about their relationship and gently suggest small solutions for him, but the issue with your mother-in- law won’t be resolved overnight. It will take time and patience on your part. As for your relationship with your mother-in-law, you can create whatever boundaries you want. My only caution is to be careful not to bad-mouth your in-laws in front of your partner when you feel frustrated. Whatever issues you’re having, you don’t want to taint your partner’s relationship with their parents. When possible, have your husband address issues with his mother directly—and not by saying, “My wife said ____.” Instead, use “we” language, such as “We think ____.” Using “we” language will make it appear to be a joint decision instead of something that comes from only one person. “My partner is always late for everything.” If your boundary has been stated and not honored, you must change your behavior to promote peace. Here are some possible options: Drive separately. Get comfortable with being late. Give your partner warnings. Accept that you’re with someone who is habitually late. “My partner loans money to family members, and I hate it.” Not loaning people money may be your rule, but not your partner’s. Here are a few options for resolving the issue: If your partner is using your joint accounts, you can set a rule about using only discretionary funds to help others. If a particular person habitually borrows, set some guidelines. Discuss the short- and long-term impact that loaning money has on your household. Talk about other ways the funds could be useful. Difficult Periods in a Long-Term Romantic Relationship In most marriages, people report a decline in satisfaction during the first year, soon after kids are born, and when the kids leave home. The First Year For many couples, learning how to coexist has its challenges, whether emotionally, from sharing the same physical space, and/or from dealing with finances. They spend the first year of marriage acclimating themselves to extended family and their many new roles and experiences. When working with newly married couples, I notice the following three issues: 1. Learning how to navigate personal time, along with work and other life roles 2. Distributing household tasks and responsibilities 3. Managing expectations and relationships with extended family The first year is about learning to build a life together. During this time, it’s essential to be clear about your individual boundaries as well as your common ones. For example: What do you need? What do the two of you need as a couple? Both sets of boundaries are equally important. Many couples experience hardships in the first year simply because they haven’t clearly defined their limits and expectations. Co-Parenting When you put two parents together, you get two different parenting philosophies. Rarely (actually, I’ve never seen it, but I’m hopeful) do parents agree on everything. Many couples go into parenting with the assumption that their partner will know what they need and will meet these unspoken needs. When I was a guest on the Whole Mamas podcast, host Stephanie Greunke spoke about wanting to be able to prepare dinner with minimal interruptions. She expected her husband to read the situation and jump in to help. It never occurred to her to say, “While I’m preparing dinner, please take the kids upstairs and keep them engaged so that I can quickly get through the process.” Instead, she suffered in silence, which, inevitably, created resentfulness. When couples become parents, their relationship is less romantic, and they become more distant and businesslike with each other as they attend to their kids. Mundane basics like keeping kids fed, bathed, and clothed take energy, time, and resolve. In an effort to keep the family running smoothly, parents discuss carpool pickups and grocery runs instead of sharing worldviews or their thoughts on presidential elections. Questions about their day are replaced with questions about whether the diaper looks full. These changes can be more profound than people realize. Fundamental identities may shift from wife to mother or from lovers to parents. Beyond sexual intimacy, new parents tend to stop saying and doing the little things that please their spouses. Flirty texts are replaced with messages that read like a grocery receipt. Before having children, it’s essential to communicate the importance of maintaining the integrity of romance in your relationship. After children arrive, remember to focus on the partnership consciously. This isn’t easy when kids have needs that seem more important than date night, but children benefit greatly from parents with a healthy relationship. With that in mind, make the marriage a priority. Boundaries That Are Important for Parents Having consistent date nights Scouting repeatable babysitters for personal and couple time Asking for help from family Assigning kids a bedtime Prioritizing time to talk about topics other than the kids The Empty Nest When children leave home, parents who have built their identity around parenting may find it challenging to adjust to an empty nest. It can be particularly difficult to shift the focus back to the romantic partnership. But having kids isn’t a reason to abandon yourself and your marriage. When you become a parent, you add kids to your life. You don’t give up your life to parent children. If porous or rigid boundaries prohibited you from having a healthy partnership, set healthy boundaries now. Commit to getting to know your spouse again, date each other, and spend time together. You can’t re-create what you had before, but you can create something new. The Curse of Poor Communication As I said, the biggest issue with most romantic relationships is poor communication. If people could learn to communicate what they want earlier in the dating process, many relationships would be happier. A failure to communicate is a missed opportunity to have your needs met. The number one reason that people fail to communicate their needs is the fear of being seen as mean or needy. But it’s okay to have needs, and it’s reasonable to think that your partner would be willing to meet most of your needs. So state them early, because resentment leads to breakups and divorce. Needs Within Reason That said, it isn’t the responsibility of one person to fulfill every need you have. For instance, if your partner tends to offer you advice when you just want someone to listen, it may be more helpful to share with a friend. We can’t change people or convince them to be different from the core of who they are, and some needs may feel to your partner like an attempt to change them. In your relationships, it’s essential to consider if your request is reasonable. Requests are unreasonable when the other person can’t meet the need. For example, an unreasonable request could sound like “You can never bring up the past.” A reasonable request might sound like “If you bring up the past, I will verbalize that you’re crossing a boundary, and I will redirect the conversation.” Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. If you’re single, ask yourself: What are my top five needs in a relationship? When will I communicate my boundaries? How will I naturally communicate them? What issues will be hardest for me to set boundaries for? How would I like a potential partner to receive my boundaries? If you’re in a relationship, ask yourself: What are my top five needs in my relationship? Is my partner aware of my needs? What is the biggest issue in my relationship? Have I set any boundaries with my partner? Am I honoring the boundaries I set with my partner? In what new ways can I share my boundaries with my partner? 12 Friendships Your boundaries are a reflection of how willing you are to advocate for the life that you want. “I hate my job,” Dave told his friend Kevin on their way home from work. As Kevin listened to Dave complain about his workday, his wife, and people in general, he felt drained and stuck. He loved his friend, but every time Dave called, Kevin took a deep breath before answering. He knew what was in store. At least twice a week, he participated in a one-sided conversation with Dave. Yet whenever Kevin needed something, it was Dave who showed up to help. They’d been best friends since high school, and despite not going to the same college, they kept in touch. Since both of them had a thirty-minute drive home, they got into the rhythm of talking twice a week and texting throughout the day. Kevin thought Dave was funny, outgoing, and fun to be around. But he couldn’t stand Dave’s constant complaining. Instead of truly being engaged in the conversation, Kevin said “mm-hmm” a lot and rarely provided feedback. He dreaded their calls but didn’t think it would be nice to say anything or try to change the pattern of their communication. Kevin considered himself a relatively assertive, take-charge type of person, but he couldn’t fathom hurting his best friend’s feelings. He wanted to preserve their friendship while creating some distance in their interactions. He tried ignoring some of Dave’s calls, but when Dave said, “I called you earlier,” Kevin felt he had to give a valid reason for not answering his phone. Since he didn’t have a valid reason, however, he continued answering. “What can I do, without feeling guilty about not picking up his calls?” Kevin asked me. Immediately, we began talking about ways to respond and how to manage his discomfort. I told him that even though easing his discomfort wouldn’t happen overnight, the more he practiced setting a boundary, the more assured he would feel. Initially, I asked Kevin to start talking more about himself to see if that would shift the dialogue. He noticed that helped some, but Dave still complained most of the time. Then I asked Kevin to steer the conversation by saying, “Tell me something good that happened today.” That strategy helped as well, but Dave still complained. Kevin decided he could handle talking to Dave once a week for fifteen minutes instead of their usual thirty minutes. For the most part, Kevin stuck to what we discussed. When he didn’t, however, he immediately suffered the consequences of a draining dialogue for thirty minutes twice a week. Set a Boundary or Suffer the Consequences of Not Setting One Outside of family, friendships are the hardest relationships in which to implement boundaries. Your friends are often open with you about who offended them and how they felt. This makes it very difficult to set a boundary if you believe it’s the exact thing they’re likely to perceive as mean or offensive. But there is hope, and many friendships have survived these requests. Perhaps your friends will as well. And remember, if a relationship ends because of a boundary, it’s a sign of a bigger problem. According to my Instagram Stories polls, 81 percent of people have had an issue with the way friends talk about their dating habits. When problems are not addressed and boundaries are not set, relationship challenges persist. Our relationships are a reflection of our boundaries or lack thereof. Other people have no idea of our listening capacity or emotional capacity, so it’s up to us to use our words and behaviors to make them aware. How do we exercise our boundaries guilt-free? Again, we can’t. But they are like muscles. The more we set them, the easier they become to set and maintain. We assume our friends will be heartbroken if we set a boundary. This is probably because we hear them complain about how others treat them. But is it possible they might be responsible for some of the issues they have with others? I had a friend in college who complained about the things her boyfriend and other friends said about her. For a while, I listened, but then I started to evaluate the truth of these statements about her. It wasn’t my job to tell my friend she was wrong, but I also didn’t have to listen to her whine about how others had wronged her. It wasn’t necessarily “nice” of me to pretend to listen to her while saying “mm-hmm” repeatedly, so I started to shift the conversations toward other topics. To be present, it was vital for me to connect with her on subjects that created an engaging dialogue between us. I liked many things about her and didn’t want to end our relationship, so steering our discussions in a different direction allowed me to create a healthier friendship with her. How do you know the difference between a healthy and an unhealthy friendship? Signs of a Healthy Friendship Your friend wants to see you grow. The friendship is mutually supportive. The friendship is mutually beneficial. Your friendship evolves as you evolve. You understand how to support each other. Setting boundaries doesn’t threaten the friendship. Your friend is happy for you to be yourself. Your friend acknowledges your quirks and works around them. You can talk to your friend about your feelings. Signs of an Unhealthy Friendship The relationship is competitive. You exhibit your worst behavior when you’re with your friend. You feel emotionally drained after connecting with your friend. Your friend tries to embarrass you in front of others. You don’t have anything in common. Your friend shares details of your personal life with others. The friendship is not reciprocal (i.e., you give more than you receive). You’re unable to work through disagreements. Your friend doesn’t respect your boundaries. The relationship is enmeshed/codependent. Dealing with Complaining Complaining falls into one of three categories: venting, problem- solving, or ruminating. Venting is a way to talk about issues without seeking guidance but to simply let out your frustrations. Problem- solving is seeking guidance or advice on how to correct an issue. Ruminating is talking about the same issues over and over without trying to problem-solve or work through your frustrations in any real way. Ruminating is essentially dumping on others. Rarely do I hear people have an issue with venting or problem-solving. It’s rumination that becomes an issue. Almost everyone complains about something, but the frequency matters. No one enjoys hearing someone ruminate about the same thing repeatedly. The friend who complains all the time does so without limitation because we have provided a space for it. Ways to Deal with a Chronic Complainer 1. Empathize when appropriate. 2. Redirect the conversation by changing the subject. 3. Be intentional in your dialogue, and stay on topic. 4. Lead by example; don’t complain. 5. Ask before offering an opinion, and be mindful of whether the person can handle the truth. 6. Don’t be dismissive (e.g., “It isn’t so bad” or “You’ll get over it”). 7. After you’ve done all you can, draw a clear boundary around the time allotted for the conversation and how often you will talk. What to Say to Someone When You Don’t Want to Give Them Advice 1. “I’m not sure how to help you with that.” 2. “That sounds like a big issue. Have you thought about talking it over with this person who is bothering you?” 3. “How have you thought about handling the situation?” 4. “What I would do is completely biased and based on me. I’d like to explore what you could do in this situation.” If you are the person complaining, it’s also helpful to set some boundaries with yourself. How to Manage Chronic Complaining 1. Pay attention to how often you complain. 2. State whether you’re simply venting or looking for feedback. 3. Consciously consider the purpose of your conversations with people. 4. Work through feelings by journaling, which is beneficial. Reasons Behind Boundary Issues in Friendships The older we become, the harder it is to create new friendships and renegotiate old ones. It particularly becomes harder to make friends after we reach thirty. As we grow older, our ability to nurture and give time to our friendships competes with parenting, work, romance, and family relationships. After thirty, people often experience internal shifts in how they approach friendships. Self-discovery gives way to self-knowledge, so you become pickier about the people you surround yourself with, according to Marla Paul, author of the book The Friendship Crisis: Finding, Making, and Keeping Friends When You’re Not a Kid Anymore. “The bar is higher than when we were younger and were willing to meet almost anyone for a margarita,” she says. We tend to overthink the interactions more. “Will they like me?” or “Did I say the right thing?” When we maintain a friendship for ten years or more, we become accustomed to specific roles in the relationship. Therefore, shifting our boundaries seems like a betrayal of the relationship. But people change all the time. As we grow in friendships, other areas of our lives likely grow as well. With my friends from high school, we’ve had to learn to adjust as we transitioned to college, our first “real” jobs, serious dating relationships, and perhaps marriage and children. All life changes require a shift in boundaries, and some relationships don’t survive the changes. The dismissal is perhaps an indication of a crack in the foundation of the relationship, not the result of the new request. As we change, it’s simply natural for some friendships to fall away. Common Boundary Issues in Friendships Being the Relationship Adviser I once had a friend who insisted on sharing her relationship issues with me. I kindly asked her not to share the ins and outs of her relationship with me because it was making me feel jaded toward her boyfriend. Initially, she didn’t understand. But after my consistent redirection, she got the point. Setting this boundary didn’t ruin our friendship. Our relationship would have suffered if I had continued to listen and shared my honest feedback. It wouldn’t have been healthy for either of us. Nothing requires you to be the dating expert for your friends. You can listen, share stories, and help them problem-solve. But if doing any of those things makes you feel uncomfortable, you can shift gears. Loaning Money and Possessions “My friend always wants to borrow money. How should I handle this?” Possible Boundaries 1. Set your expectation up front: “I will loan you ____ with the expectation that you’ll pay it back by ____. If, for any reason, you can’t meet my deadline, give me a heads-up at least the day before.” 2. “I’m not able to loan you any money.” 3. “I’m not able to give you ____, but I can offer ____.” Keep in mind that when you loan money and possessions, you’re making yourself a lending source for others. If you don’t want to be a lending source, stop offering your resources. Offering Unsolicited Advice and Feedback “I don’t like my friend’s wife. What should I do?” Possible Boundary Learn to coexist peacefully. Your friend won’t leave his partner just because you don’t like her. Telling him will likely cause an unnecessary rift, because it’s an issue that can’t be resolved. Getting Burned Out from Advice-Giving “My friend is always dating the same kind of person. I’ve told her over and over that she needs to date a different type.” Possible Boundaries 1. You’ve told her what you think, and she isn’t listening. Stop repeating yourself. 2. Bite your tongue when your opinion isn’t valued. 3. Allow people to make their own mistakes and experience their own outcomes. Receiving Unsolicited Advice and Feedback “My friend is always telling me what to do with my life. How do I make them stop?” Possible Boundaries 1. Stop inviting them in. Share less. Your friends respond to what you tell them. 2. Say, “I need you to listen to me. I don’t want any advice or feedback.” Tell them that you want to vent without being given any advice or comments. Dealing with a Needy Friend “My friend constantly wants me to do things with them, and it’s excruciating.” Possible Boundaries 1. Stop agreeing to show up in a way that you can’t maintain long- term. 2. Allow for healthy distance in your friendship with time together and apart. 3. Decide which things you enjoy doing with this friend, and do only what you enjoy with them.