of others. She didn’t trust herself without feedback from other people. With healthy emotional boundaries, you express your feelings and personal information to others gradually, not all at once. This also means you share only when it’s appropriate, and you choose your confidants carefully. In an Instagram poll, I asked, “Have you ever shared a friend’s secret with someone else?” Seventy-two percent said, “Yes, I’ve shared a secret.” I received several DMs explaining why the secrets were shared. Here are a few reasons: 1. The secret was too burdensome. 2. There was a safety concern. 3. “I can’t keep a secret.” 4. “I tell my partner everything.” Examples of Emotional Boundary Violations Sharing too much too soon (oversharing) Sharing inappropriate emotional information with children Emotional dumping/excessive venting Pushing someone to share information they aren’t comfortable sharing Invalidating someone’s feelings Telling people how to feel, such as “You shouldn’t be sad about that” Minimizing the impact of something, such as “That wasn’t a big deal” Pushing people to move past complicated feelings swiftly Gossiping about the personal details of another person’s life Setting an emotional boundary sounds like this: “When I share things with you, I expect you to keep them confidential.” “I feel uncomfortable sharing my feelings. I would feel better if you acknowledged what I’m saying with a nod.” “I hear that you have a lot of things going on. I don’t feel equipped to help you. Have you considered talking to a therapist?” “I don’t feel comfortable talking about that topic.” “It isn’t okay for you to tell me how I should feel. My feelings are valid.” “I will take my time processing my feelings. Don’t rush me to move on.” “It’s okay for me to feel how I feel in any situation.” Here are a few ways to honor your emotional boundaries: 1. Ask people if they want you to just listen, or if they’re looking for feedback. This will help you determine whether or not to offer suggestions. 2. Share only with people you trust who can indeed hold space for your emotions. Material Boundaries Material boundaries have to do with your possessions. Your stuff is your stuff. If you decide to share your stuff, it’s your choice. You also have the right to determine how others treat your possessions. If you loan a friend a tool in good condition, it’s appropriate to expect the tool to be returned in the same shape. When people give you something back in worse condition, they’ve violated your material boundaries. Examples of Material Boundary Violations Using things longer than the agreed-on time frame Never returning a borrowed item Loaning borrowed items to others without permission Damaging a possession and refusing to pay for it Returning possessions in poor condition Setting a material boundary sounds like this: “I will loan you money, but I expect the full amount back by Friday.” “I can’t loan you my car this weekend.” “Be sure to return my tool in good condition.” “I can’t loan you any money.” “You can borrow my suit, but if you stain it, you’ll have to pay for dry cleaning.” Here are a few ways to honor your material boundaries: 1. Do not loan things to people who’ve demonstrated that they will not respect your possessions. 2. Share your expectations for your possessions up front. Time Boundaries In my experience, of the six areas listed, time is the boundary area that people tend to struggle with the most. Time boundaries consist of how you manage your time, how you allow others to use your time, how you deal with favor requests, and how you structure your free time. People with these issues struggle with work-life balance, self- care, and prioritizing their needs. Giving up your time to others is one significant way that you might violate your time boundaries. If you don’t have time for something that you want to do, you don’t have healthy boundaries with time. Examples of How We Violate Time Boundaries and How They Are Violated by Others Calling multiple times in a row for non-emergencies Expecting someone to drop everything in order to provide help Calling or sending text messages late when the recipient is sleeping Asking others to do things for free Overcommitting Having long conversations with emotionally draining people Requesting favors at a time when it’s clear the other person isn’t available Asking someone to stay late at work for no additional pay Accepting favor requests from people who won’t reciprocate Setting a time boundary sounds like this: “I’m unable to stay late today.” “I work from nine o’clock to five o’clock, so I’m not available to chat throughout the day.” “I can’t help you this weekend.” “I can help you with your taxes, but my fee is seventy-five dollars.” “I won’t be able to make it to your event on Tuesday.” Here are a few ways to honor your time boundaries: 1. Before you say yes to a request, check your calendar to make sure you’re not overcommitting. Don’t try to squeeze in another event or task, or you’ll be upset about doing so. 2. When you’re busy, allow calls to go to voicemail and texts or emails to go unread until it’s convenient for you to respond. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. When boundaries are violated, it’s critical to have a conversation about what happened and how you felt about it. Because we can’t control others, we must focus on what we will say or what actions we can take if the violation is repeated. Below you will find examples of each type of boundary. Read the scenario and consider what you would do or say for each. Physical boundary example: Your coworker enters your cubicle while you’re busy completing a task. When you don’t respond, your coworker persists by leaning over you at your desk. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Sexual boundary example: Your friend’s husband makes comments about his sexual prowess. He then begins texting you provocative innuendos, which makes you feel uncomfortable. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Intellectual boundary example: You just ended a ten-year-long friendship. You’re sharing your sadness about it with your partner, who says, “You have other friends. Get over it.” Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Emotional boundary example: You tell your friend a secret, and your friend shares it with one of her friends. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Material boundary example: A friend asks to borrow your shirt. The last time you loaned them a shirt, they returned it with a hole in it. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. Time boundary example: You’re under a critical deadline at work. One of your team members asks you for help on one of their projects. Consider what you would do or say to set a boundary in this scenario. 5 What Boundary Violations Look Like People do not have to like, agree with, or understand your boundaries to respect them. For the entire first year of her relationship with her boyfriend, Jamie says they spent most days with each other and talked about their future. They enjoyed trips together without arguing, and he was a fantastic listener. But if they had a bad day, he immediately withdrew his affection. This only made Jamie crave him more. After a few days, he inevitably said all the right things to win her back. “He’s nice most of the time,” Jamie told me. “But sometimes he gets in these moods and picks at me about everything. When I don’t give him what he wants, he gives me the silent treatment and pouts.” Jamie wanted help understanding what she could do to improve their relationship. For five sessions, she talked about how she needed to understand him better, develop thicker skin, and learn to communicate in a way that worked for their relationship. I taught her some communication skills, but she said, “Nothing works.” Jamie blamed herself for not understanding what her boyfriend wanted. She was sure she was the cause of their disputes and the lack of resolution between them. Once I knew she was comfortable working with me, I asked, “Is it possible your boyfriend holds some responsibility in the communication issues?” Jamie quickly defended him. “He communicates very well. He tells me exactly what he needs, but I don’t do it correctly.” “Does he give you examples of what he wants you to do?” “No, but I have an idea of what he wants based on what he says.” After she recounted a typical conversation between them, Jamie was able to acknowledge that she’s often placed in a position where she “can never get anything right.” For example, her boyfriend might request, “I want you to cook more at home.” Then when she cooked, he’d say, “I don’t like to eat this late. Why don’t you cook earlier?” Jamie would try cooking earlier, but he would then complain about what she prepared. “You don’t listen to me,” he would say. Jamie was listening; however, she was just confused. Her boyfriend’s mixed messages kept her second-guessing what she was supposed to do. She had lost sight of what she needed, expected, and would accept because she was continually trying to please him. Our subsequent sessions together focused on the boundary violations that were taking place in her relationship. Little “b” and Big “B” Violations Boundary violations fall into two categories: Little “b”: Micro boundary violations are small violations that often occur in everyday encounters, as opposed to long-term relationships. With micro boundary violations, we aren’t usually as emotionally affected. The violation doesn’t spill over into the rest of our day, because we don’t view the encounter as significant. Micro boundary violations can become more significant over time, however, if the violations are repeated and persistent. Examples of Micro Boundary Violations 1. You’re checking out at the grocery store and notice that the cashier has an attitude. She’s short with you in conversation and bags your food aggressively. 2. You’re at a party, and a stranger comes up to you and starts talking. Thirty minutes go by, during which you learn so much about this person that you feel you could write a tell-all book. But not once have you gotten a word in edgewise. 3. You tell your coworker that you won’t be able to make it to their birthday party. They tell you how important it is for you to be there and that everyone else is coming. Your coworker may really want you there, but they are guilt-tripping you, trying to manipulate you into showing up at the party. Big “B”: Macro boundary violations are big violations that erode the fabric of our relationships with others. These are long-standing and persistent. The frequency of the violations can even change the structure of the relationship. Examples of Macro Boundary Violations 1. You’re unable to make a decision without talking to your sister, who helps you sort through everything in your life. 2. Your friend’s drinking has become your problem to manage, and you feel compelled to help every time they relapse. When you go out, you refrain from drinking because you know you’ll have to care for your friend. 3. You’re convinced everything that goes wrong in your relationship is your fault. Your partner has so many issues, and you need to do a better job of not triggering them. Now that you have a few examples, let’s talk about some common micro- and macroaggressions. Little “b” Microaggressions Microaggressions are subtle and can occur in any relationship. They include passive-aggressive behaviors meant to convey displeasure, hidden messages, or anger toward another. Whether intentionally or unintentionally, microaggressions communicate negativity. In the early stages of her relationship, Jamie’s boyfriend made small comments about how she spoke. Whenever she mispronounced a word or phrase, he mentioned it. She didn’t think anything of it until it became a consistent issue in their conversations. Later, when their relationship became rocky, he used her phrasing as an example of her poor communication. Microaggressions are commonly used in terms of race or LGBTQI+ bias, but they aren’t limited to derogatory behaviors or comments based solely on race, gender, or sexual preference. Here are a few other examples: Microaggression Examples Racism (Judging People Negatively or in a Derogatory Manner Based on Race) A white woman is on an elevator when a Black man gets on; she grips her purse. Underlying issue: Belief that Black people are dangerous. Therefore, they are up to no good. Body Shaming Rebecca has gained ten pounds. Her mother tells her, “Send me a picture.” Her mother responds, “Your face is so cute and chubby.” Underlying issue: Rebecca is gaining weight, and her mother is fat-phobic. Racial Bias (Assumptions Based on Race) Kevin, a Black man, is invited to an office holiday party with his mostly white coworkers. The sign-up sheet is passed around, and Kevin notices that someone volunteered him to bring fried chicken. Underlying issue: Racial prejudice. Gender Bias Tina is the CEO of her company. She often receives the label of “bossy,” while her male counterparts are described as influential leaders. Underlying issue: Belief that women in powerful positions have attitude problems. LGBTQI+ Bias Kevin takes his partner to the office holiday party, and Kevin’s coworker says, “I didn’t know you were that way. You don’t act gay.” Underlying issue: Belief that gay men present as feminine. — M                               harmless by the deliverer. However, microaggressions are harmful expressions of a more in- depth belief system. Though seemingly small, they have a huge impact. Ways to Handle Microaggression 1. Assertively address what you perceive as a microaggression: “I notice that you said, ‘I don’t sound Black.’ What does that mean?” 2. Suggest more appropriate behavior. For example, when others call her “bossy,” Tina could point out that she’s simply assertive and willing to lead. Oversharing When we overshare, it’s an effort to connect to another person. But oversharing involves telling people information that’s inappropriate based on the context, disclosing someone else’s private information, or providing in-depth personal details in a relationship that hasn’t established that level of disclosure. The oversharer usually has no idea they’ve gone too far. People overshare with me in social settings a lot. Sometimes it’s simply because I appear interested and allow them to talk without interruption. But I think it’s usually because I’m a therapist and exude an “I like listening to problems” energy. I do enjoy listening to people share, but it can be awkward socially. Oversharing Examples Inappropriate Context You’ve been assigned to train a new employee. Instead of learning about the job, your new coworker shares details about her problems with her ex. Underlying issue: This personal information isn’t appropriate in the context of your role as a trainer. Someone Else’s Information Your friend’s college roommate comes to visit, and the three of you hang out. While your friend is in the bathroom, her roommate tells you about the time your friend had an abortion. Underlying issue: Your friend’s roommate is sharing deeply personal information about someone else. In-Depth Personal Information While picking up groceries, Megan asks the cashier, “How is your day going?” The cashier starts to tell Megan about an argument she had with her boyfriend about his sex life with his ex-girlfriend. Megan stands there listening to the story, feeling nervous and uncomfortable. Underlying issue: The cashier’s disclosure is deeply personal and not appropriate for this interaction. — O                       clueless about how they are impacting others and violating boundaries. In an attempt to connect and build closeness, they give too much information. The oversharer often ignores the nonverbal cues from others that the conversation has gone too far. Ways to Handle Oversharing 1. Gently redirect the person to a more appropriate topic. 2. Assertively say “Wow, this seems like a critical conversation that we should have at another time.” 3. Say something like “I don’t feel equipped to help with this situation. Do you mind if I change the topic of the conversation?” Guilt Trips Whenever Jamie tried to talk to her partner about their communication, he told her she had issues communicating her needs. He insisted that her problems in past relationships were due to her poor communication. Jamie became convinced that she was the one with the issue, so she felt terrible bringing it up to her boyfriend. When someone intentionally tries to make you feel bad, they are guilt-tripping you. Guilt-tripping is a manipulative strategy that people use to persuade you to do what they want. They hope you’ll feel bad, comply, or agree to something, even though you might not have done what they’ve accused you of doing. Guilt Trip Examples Ending Toxic Relationships Rob had an abusive father and felt he had to end his relationship with his dad. Even within his family, he was subject to social scrutiny. Both family members and friends disagreed with his desire to terminate the unhealthy relationship. His sister said, “He’s your father. You have to talk to him.” Underlying issue: Rob’s sister devalued the importance of setting boundaries when a relationship is unhealthy. Lacking Interest in Relationships with Certain People Amy knew her boss was a “mean girl.” When her boss invited her out for drinks after work, Amy declined. Her colleagues told her, “You could’ve at least gone out and had one drink.” Underlying issue: Amy’s coworkers didn’t feel confident enough to say no. Being Particular About What You Like You decide to bring some food for yourself to an upcoming family dinner because you know your eating preferences are different from everyone else’s. Your cousin says, “Why do you need a special diet? Is the food here not good enough for you?” Underlying issue: Your cousin is questioning your preferences and implying that you should change. Not Pleasing Others Carla was at a reunion lunch with friends from high school and said, “I don’t want to get married or have kids.” Her friend Pat said, “Everybody should have kids. Why wouldn’t you want to get married? You’re so nice.” Underlying issue: Pat tried to impose her values on Carla. Saying No Without Giving an Explanation A friend asks you, “Hey, can you help me move?” You respond no. Your friend says, “Why not? I need your help.” There are times when it’s okay to explain. Just be mindful of how the person has responded in the past to your explanations. If they accepted the explanation and moved on, go ahead and offer a brief reason. If explaining created a disagreement, keep your response brief. Underlying issue: People want you to have a reason they perceive as valid. — P              guilt trips are trying to get their needs met, but their needs may violate the requirements you have for yourself. Ways to Handle Guilt-Tripping 1. Call it out: “Are you trying to make me feel bad about my decisions?” 2. Make the conversation about you, not them: “It’s nothing personal. I just have preferences for myself.” 3. Declare that you’ve made your decision: “Your response seems like you’re trying to change my mind.” Big “B” Macroaggressions Boundary violations that disrupt the fabric of a relationship are in the macro category. While violations occur routinely as a part of the relationship dynamic, macro violations, such as enmeshment, codependency, trauma bonding, and counterdependency can cause long-term damage. Enmeshment In enmeshed relationships, individualization is not acceptable. Neither are boundaries. These relationships thrive on each person being very similar to the other. If one person makes attempts to set limits, create new roles, or shift the dynamics, the relationship is in danger of termination. This is enmeshment: Inability to be different from the other in a relationship Lack of individual identity Unclear sense of self separate from the other person Lack of boundaries Confusion between the quantity of time spent together versus the quality of the time spent together Oversharing Absorbing the emotions of the other person as your own Rejection by the other person if you attempt to form an individual identity Enmeshed relationships violate boundaries in the following ways: Little personal space is given, emotionally or physically. The thoughts of both people must be aligned. Life decisions are based on mutual agreement and no independence of thought. Sharon Martin, LCSW, defines enmeshment as “family relationships with weak boundaries, lack of emotional separation, and intrusive demands for support or attention that prevent family members from developing a strong and independent sense of self.” Family relationships, dating relationships, and relationships at work can all suffer from enmeshment. Examples of Enmeshment You start dating someone and begin spending all your time together. Their likes become your likes. Your friends and the life you had before are suddenly diminished. You were pretty sure you wanted to buy a new house, but after talking to your parents, you changed your mind. Your parents always know what’s best for you. Your friend is having issues with her partner. She always calls you to problem-solve their issues. You willingly help because you want her to be happy. You’re even invited to speak with her partner about what you and your friend think is best for the relationship. Boundaries for Enmeshment If you agree to help, ask how they plan to handle their problems in the future. Allow for physical space in the relationship. Assess your need for constant contact with another person. Bring other people into the mix to create additional support. Before you share, ask if it’s the appropriate time and setting. Reclaim or create your self-identity, separate from anyone else’s. Codependency In codependent relationships, we believe we must help people avoid consequences, saving them from unpleasant experiences. We think it’s our role to protect them. But rather than protect, we enable the other person to continue their unhealthy behavior. We see the person we’re enabling as helpless and unable to take care of themselves without us. The term “codependent” has been around for decades and is often used when describing dysfunctional family dynamics, especially when addiction is involved. But codependency pertains to any relationship where people become emotionally entangled with the feelings and outcomes of others. In codependent relationships, it’s challenging to separate what we feel from what others think and feel. Codependency is well-meaning, but we suffer because our own needs are often unmet or unnoticed. In fact, as codependents, we have a hard time distinguishing our needs from the needs of the other person. Enabling is a significant part of a codependent relationship. It involves supporting the unhealthy behaviors of someone through action or inaction. Codependency usually happens as a result of unhealthy boundaries. This is codependency: Overextending yourself Avoiding discussions about real issues or problems Cleaning up the mess that others created for themselves Making excuses for the poor behavior of others Tending to other people’s needs and neglecting your own