What Relationships Without Boundaries Look Like Carlos considered himself a good friend. When his roommate asked to borrow his car, he immediately said yes. He didn’t ask any questions and trusted his roommate would do right by him. When his roommate returned, however, Carlos immediately smelled cigarette smoke in the car and saw that the tank was nearly out of gas. “What kind of person smokes in another person’s car and leaves the tank almost empty?” he thought. He was disappointed to find that his roommate failed to meet his unspoken expectations. Communicating our boundaries isn’t easy, but without it, we set ourselves up for long-term suffering. We simply can’t have a healthy relationship with another person without communicating what’s acceptable and unacceptable to us. If we aren’t proactive about this in our relationships, we can be sure the other person will set their boundaries. That forces us to operate by their rules and their rules only. In Chapter 6, I will show you how to Boundaries are communicate boundaries clearly, but not unspoken know that if you haven’t told someone what yours are, they can’t possibly rules. know. People can’t meet a standard that we never express. Boundaries are not unspoken rules. Unspoken boundaries are invisible, and they often sound like “They should’ve known better” or “Common sense would say...” Common sense is based on our own life experiences, however, and it isn’t the same for everyone. That’s why it’s essential to communicate and not assume that people are aware of our expectations in relationships. We must inform others of our limits and take responsibility for upholding them. Relationships that have the potential to be healthy often become unhealthy because of either rigid or porous boundaries. Either we are strict about them, or we give people free rein with no limits. These scenarios create one-sided relationships, in which one person does most of the work to keep the relationship going. But healthy relationships are between two people who are mutually supportive of each other. (The only occasion when one- sided relationships are appropriate is in the parent-child dynamic.) Simply put, relationships without boundaries are dysfunctional, unreasonable, and hard to manage. They operate mostly based on the assumption that something “magical” will happen to turn it all around. But hoping that our relationships will repair themselves out of nowhere is a long shot at best. Without boundaries in relationships, we also can’t have healthy self-care practices. In fact, most people without healthy limits think that engaging in self-care is selfish, so it feels terrible when they try to do it. They believe that their self-care is at the expense of being there for another person. Self-care brings up feelings of guilt, because they feel like others will fall apart without their help. In these kinds of relationships, our role is that of a helper. We worry about the other person and don’t trust that they can care for themselves unless we enable them. Our attention is multifocused because we are continually trying to balance the needs of multiple people with our own needs. Even when we try to focus on ourselves, we tend to still focus on others and base our decisions on what these other people might think. Without boundaries, relationships usually end, or we become fed up from being mistreated. Sometimes we allow mistreatment for so long that we can’t take it anymore. Then, since we never clearly communicated our unhappiness, the other person is shocked to find out how much we suffered. When we do become clear about our expectations, saying “I need you to ____,” we at least learn exactly who is and isn’t willing to honor what we need and want. In your relationships, are people clear about how you desire to be treated? How are you treating yourself? Others learn a lot about you from watching how you treat yourself. People can sense your lack of self-esteem or neediness based on how you talk to yourself, talk about yourself, and treat yourself behaviorally. Be kind to yourself, because the people in your life are watching. This doesn’t mean that people have a right to be mean. Common Feelings When We Don’t Set Boundaries When you say yes but want to say no, you feel something “off” in your body. When you allow people to take advantage of you, you feel something in your body that isn’t right. When you give to others begrudgingly, you feel it in your body. So if you learn to pay attention to your body, it will tell you when it’s time to set boundaries—in the sigh before you answer your phone, the desire to avoid certain people, or your hesitance to say yes. You might also feel a tightness in your belly, an ache in your shoulder, or a pain in your neck or temple. As you become more aware of your personal signs, you’ll discover how often you put your own needs aside to please or take care of others. The emotions that people most commonly feel when they don’t set boundaries are resentment, anger, and frustration. Here are a few common causes of these emotions in relationships: Feeling unheard Setting a boundary but not gaining the result you desired Committing to things you don’t want to do Feeling used Avoiding setting boundaries Let’s break down each of these emotions in a bit more detail. Resentment At its core, resentment is disappointment. Then you mix in anger and fear. Because resentment is often an uncomfortable emotion to admit and express, many people deny feeling it. So they often express it in a passive-aggressive way. Instead of acknowledging “I’m feeling resentful,” they hint at the feeling through terse and evasive conversation. Or they avoid time with the offending person or dismiss the impact of the offensive behavior. Instead, they assume the other person should just figure out why they’re upset. Anger Anger is a feeling of hostility or annoyance, and it can be expressed inwardly or outwardly. When expressed inwardly, people with unhealthy boundaries engage in negative self-talk, self-sabotage, self-blaming, or low self-esteem. Instead of holding others accountable, the anger becomes an issue within. This often causes anxiety, depression, or other mental health issues. Anger toward others looks like blaming without personal accountability, adult tantrums (yelling, cursing, rage, crying fits, breaking things, verbal abuse), or an overall apathetic disposition toward others. Both inwardly and outwardly expressed anger can negatively impact relationships. Frustration Frustration ensues when we’re unable to achieve a goal or get a need met—when we try something and feel that we failed. For example, let’s say you work up the courage to set a boundary and communicate it to another person, only to find that they don’t honor it. This is sure to cause frustration. When we feel frustrated after making our expectations known, we say things like “Well, they won’t listen anyway” or “I already tried that, and it didn’t work.” Frustration leads to a loss of hope and motivation. But feeling frustrated isn’t a reason to stop trying to implement boundaries. Setting them takes perseverance. There are so many reasons why setting them might not have worked. Here are a few: The other person wasn’t ready to hear you. What you said was misunderstood because you didn’t follow through with the boundary you set. You failed to honor the boundaries you set up, so people couldn’t understand that you were serious. You made a request but didn’t set a boundary. Whatever the reason, you can try again. Don’t allow frustration to hold you back from getting your needs met. Things We Do to Avoid Setting Boundaries Move Away “I just moved away so they would stop asking me to do things.” I’ve heard this several times from clients in my office. It may seem like an easy fix to blame the other person and leave their physical proximity, but you will almost certainly find yourself creating new relationships with the same boundary issues. Besides, technology has made it easier for us to be tempted to offer long-distance support emotionally and financially. We can call, talk, and text without huge costs, and depending on where we move, the other person might be able to quickly visit. Distance doesn’t always solve the problem, so a physical shift is simply not the answer. It’s a mental change that’s required. And then we change our behaviors to align with what we say we need. The truth is that unhealthy boundaries will follow you wherever you go unless you learn to verbalize them. Gossip Here’s the definition of “gossip”: Talking about people in a judgmental manner with the intent to cause harm Making statements behind the back of the person being discussed Instead of setting a direct boundary, we often use gossip as a way of processing our frustrations. But gossip isn’t helpful and only leads to more resentment. It does nothing to improve the relationship or end the behavior that bothers us. Complaints Complaining to others won’t fix our unhealthy boundaries. Similar to gossiping, complaining is another way of processing frustration. However, with complaining, we usually play the role of victim, saying things like “Why does everyone expect so much from me? My husband knows I need help, but he doesn’t offer. I don’t understand why people can’t do things for themselves.” Along with not being a solution, complaining—much like gossiping—builds resentment. As we air our grievances, we become more frustrated and annoyed, reinforcing the belief that others are doing things to us. We don’t stop to evaluate what we’re allowing to happen by not setting clear boundaries. Avoidance When I bought a new car, I didn’t want to tell people they couldn’t borrow it. I thought making it difficult for them would end the issues with borrowing. But then they started asking me to drive them places. By not creating a boundary, I created a new problem. There’s nothing easy about these tough conversations. We don’t want to hurt anyone’s feelings, so we allow issues to fester. Then we inevitably become resentful, angry, or frustrated. We hope that eventually people will figure out what our avoidant behavior means and change of their own accord. For example, while in college I lost interest in a guy I was dating. As he continued to call, I rarely answered, thinking he’d eventually get the point and stop calling. When I did answer, I used excuses like “Between work and school, I don’t have time to hang out” and “I have homework.” The truth was, I simply didn’t like him. After a few weeks, I couldn’t take it anymore. When he called, I said, “I don’t like you in the same way you like me. I think you should stop calling.” Guess what? Just like that, he stopped calling. I was no longer annoyed every time my phone rang, and he was free to call someone who was really interested in him. Everyone was happy. Avoidance wasn’t an effective strategy for me, and it isn’t for you either. In the gentlest way possible, say “No, thanks, that doesn’t work for me; I’m not interested.” Or, “No, you can’t borrow my car.” Don’t waste your time and anyone else’s time hoping they will figure it out. Cutoff A cutoff is when you abruptly (sometimes without explanation) disconnect from another person. Before you cut people off, ask yourself this: 1. Was the other person aware of my issues with the relationship? 2. Have I tried setting a boundary? 3. Did I uphold my boundary and hold the other person accountable? Cutoffs happen as a result of believing that the other person is incapable of change, that they won’t honor our boundary, or that we have let things go so far that we’re no longer interested in repairing the relationship. Cutting people off may seem like an easy way to resolve relationship issues, but we can’t escape setting limits if we want healthy relationships. Exercise This chapter began with Erica’s story about burnout. During a retreat, I learned an activity that I’ve shared with my clients, many of whom found it helpful. The “What’s on Your Plate?” exercise is a constructive way to identify what you already have on your plate before committing to more. On a separate sheet of paper, write down all of the duties, activities, and responsibilities attached to your various roles in life. Use the key below, and put a symbol next to each item. (Some may require more than one symbol.) Enjoy More time Most time Energizes For You For Others After you’ve completed the activity, ask yourself: Are you surprised by anything on your list? What’s missing from your list? What do you have to eliminate to spend more time on the things you enjoy? In the next chapter, we’ll discuss why we tolerate boundary issues, why it’s so hard to set limits, and how childhood trauma and neglect make this process uniquely challenging for us. 3 Why Don’t We Have Healthy Boundaries? Boundaries are the key to healthier relationships. “You are now the man of the house,” Justin’s mother said to him after his parents divorced. He was twelve years old. Suddenly feeling responsible for his younger brothers, Justin began watching them after school, started their dinners in the evening, and helped get them ready for bed. He even took them along when he hung out with his friends. Justin’s mother was absent a lot, both physically and emotionally. When she wasn’t working, she was debilitated by depression in the wake of the divorce. His father had moved on and was dating a woman who had children of her own. So even though he was still a child himself, Justin became the caretaker and emotional support for his family. His mother asked his opinion about how to take care of his brothers. She cried and shared her emotions about the divorce with him. Among his peers, Justin was considered “mature” for his age. They saw him as wise, so they quickly opened up to him. When he came to me, Justin was twenty-nine years old, but he was still heavily involved in caring for his brothers. In fact, he was the go-to person for most of the people in his life. His friends leaned on him for sound advice, both his parents called him whenever there was an issue with his brothers, and his brothers used him for financial and emotional support. By twenty-nine, he was tired of always playing the role of the responsible problem solver, but he couldn’t see a way out. After all, everyone needed him. The pattern even affected Justin’s romantic relationships. He always found the “project” person to date—someone who needed help. His longest relationship lasted nine months, but once his partner no longer needed him, the relationship quickly fizzled. He was aware that he tended to attract needy people. He didn’t particularly enjoy helping others, but he did believe his help was necessary. As he constantly gave to others, Justin never asked for help for himself. He was self-sufficient and self-reliant, and feeling helpless made him uncomfortable. Even when a girlfriend tried to do something nice for him, he didn’t like it. He hoped to get married and have children. But maintaining attachments with anyone other than his existing family and friends was a challenge. Justin needed to learn how to acknowledge his emotional needs and allow others to be there for him. During his parents’ divorce, he came to the conclusion that his needs were too complicated for others and that he was better at giving support than receiving it. It was clear that his relationship issues were the product of the emotional neglect he’d experienced as a child. Emotional neglect happens when you don’t receive sufficient emotional support from a parent or caregiver. They may not understand a child’s needs, or they may devalue the need to nurture a child’s emotional well-being. People who are emotionally neglected are often confused about what they experienced. There’s a difference between emotional abuse and emotional neglect, however. Emotional neglect is unintentional, while emotional abuse is more deliberate. People who experienced emotional neglect tend to have issues developing healthy attachments to others, whether their attachment is anxious or avoidant. We focused Justin’s initial recovery on learning how to set emotional boundaries with his brothers and parents. At first, he felt uncomfortable saying to one of his brothers, “Have you asked Mom?” rather than jumping to solve a problem for them himself. He also felt it would be mean to speak to his mother about no longer being her emotional confidant. But over time, Justin noticed how his family began to see him differently. He started to talk more about himself with them and with the women he dated. He began to trust that people wanted to know about him and what he was feeling. Eventually, he was able to date someone for more than a few months. He became a son to his parents again, rather than parenting them. It wasn’t comfortable for him in the beginning, but Justin was gradually able to communicate and uphold his boundaries. What’s Keeping Us from Having Healthy Boundaries? It’s your responsibility to tell people how burdened you are in your relationships. Justin knew he wanted to step back from the caretaking role with his siblings. He was tired of being the emotional support for his parents, and he knew he had dating issues. But he didn’t realize the solution to his problems could be setting boundaries in his relationships. “It’s Them, Not Me” For our relationships to improve, we assume that the other person has to change. We’re unaware of the aspects that are within our control, such as setting boundaries. But when we do set boundaries, our relationships change because we’ve changed what we’re willing to tolerate. “We Tried Once, and It Failed” When we set a boundary and nothing changes immediately, we often assume it’s a lost cause. But there are many reasons why people don’t immediately adhere to our request, so the way we communicate it is critical. What we do after we’ve stated what we want is also vital. (You will learn the best ways to set and maintain boundaries as you continue reading.) Misinterpreting What Boundaries Are A common misconception about There’s more to boundaries is that they always mean boundaries than saying no. But we can set boundaries in many ways; saying no is just one of saying no. them. Justin set his by redirecting his brothers to talk to their parents about specific issues. He also set boundaries with himself about being more emotionally transparent in his interactions with others. Justin didn’t exactly say no to his parents when they tried to use him as their emotional support. However, he was forthcoming that he felt uncomfortable hearing about certain topics. There’s more to boundaries than saying no. The Reasons We Tolerate Boundary Issues We Aren’t Aware That We Need to Set Boundaries In Chapter 1, we discussed signs that we might need to set a boundary. The most significant symptom is discomfort, which manifests itself as anger, resentment, frustration, and burnout. When we feel any of these, we likely need to set a boundary. We tolerate unhealthy boundaries because we don’t understand our feelings, and we fail to notice the discomfort. We see that something is “off,” but we’re unaware of what is causing the discomfort. The film What’s Eating Gilbert Grape? is a great example of this. Gilbert (played by Johnny Depp) is a parentified teenager who cares for his younger siblings, one of whom is autistic (Arnie, played by Leonardo DiCaprio). Gilbert also cares for his mother, who is obese and housebound. Her weight gain began after her husband committed suicide. Gilbert struggles to have a social life outside of his family because he has unhealthy boundaries. Two of his siblings manage to build their own lives—one becomes the manager of a bakery, and the other goes away to college. But when Gilbert starts a romance with a girl visiting his town, nothing comes of it because he doesn’t create any boundaries with his family. While Gilbert is aware something is off, he isn’t aware that healthier limits could help him start a life outside of the one he’s known. We Focus on the Worst-Case Scenario Despite the fact that the worst-case scenario is often the least likely to occur, our fears of the worst tend to keep us from setting boundaries. Here are some typical worst-case-scenario thoughts: “What if they get mad at me?” “What if they want nothing to do with me?” “What if I lose a friend/family member?” “What if I say the wrong thing?” “Is setting a boundary petty?” “What if I’m called selfish?” “I don’t think anyone will listen to me.” Worst-case-scenario thinking is fear-based, and it’s the wrong hypothesis about what is most likely to happen. We can’t predict the future. We can’t predict how people will respond to our boundaries. The only thing we’re able to control is our own behavior. Our biggest fear is that we’ll lose people, so we tolerate boundary issues to maintain our relationships. We Feel We Can’t Tolerate the Discomfort of Setting Boundaries Setting limits is uncomfortable, and that discomfort is enough for most of us to shy away from setting them. So we stay silent. We can’t tolerate the discomfort of having what we assume will be difficult conversations (worst-case-scenario thinking again). One of the things I teach people is how to manage the discomfort of setting boundaries. We may not feel comfortable having difficult conversations, but we can do it. The short-term discomfort of setting a boundary isn’t a reason to continue tolerating the longer-term discomfort of the issues that inevitably result. Unhealthy relationships are frustrating and damaging to our long-term well- being. Over time and with consistent practice, setting boundaries becomes easier. Where We Learn About Boundaries Family Is Where It All Starts We are born with the urge to have our needs met. That’s why we cried, fussed, and acted out when we wanted something. We learned whether we could get our needs met based on how our parents and other caretakers responded. Parents/caregivers can guide us toward either healthy or unhealthy boundaries. From birth, the family is our primary teacher. We first learn from our mother and father, then others in the home environment, including siblings and extended family. In many cases, when we think about boundaries in the family, we think about rules set by our parents. Boundaries are not necessarily rules, however. Limits that parents have with children are expectations, preferences, and sometimes rules. Parents and caregivers typically feel comfortable communicating their expectations to children. But children often feel they don’t have a right to set boundaries for themselves. Respecting Kids’ Boundaries When my oldest daughter was around four months old, she started to demonstrate disdain toward her caregiver at our local family gym. Generally, my daughter enjoyed being held, but she didn’t like this one person in child care. Whenever we left her in child care, she would cry—so much so that they’d pull me away from a workout class to get her. It took me a few days to notice that she cried only with a particular worker. After that realization, I made a point of calling the gym beforehand to see who was working in child care that day. If it was the person my daughter seemed to be uncomfortable with, I’d wait for her shift to end before going to the gym. My daughter at four months expressed a preference for whom she did and didn’t like; I respected her preference by not forcing her to be with people who made her feel uncomfortable. Children have boundaries unless they’re shown or told it isn’t okay to have them. For kids, food preference is an attempt at setting limits. They may not know what’s best in terms of nutrition, but they know what they don’t like. Their food preferences are based on texture, smell, color, and taste. When a child sets a boundary such as not wanting to eat a particular type of food, how does the parent respond? 1. Offer other options (possibly along with the food the child didn’t want). 2. Insist that the child eat what they said they didn’t like. 3. Punish the child by not allowing them to eat anything. Here’s an idea of what the child understands about their ability to set boundaries: Option 1: “I hear you. I want you to eat something, so I will honor your request by presenting other options.” Option 2: “Your boundaries are not important to me, and I know what’s best for you.” Option 3: “You will be punished for having preferences. Do what I say.” When a child sets a boundary such as “I don’t want to hug your friend,” how does the parent respond? 1. Allow the child to be self-selective about whom they feel comfortable showing affection to. 2. Push the child to hug the friend. 3. Shame or threaten the child by saying “It’s not nice to tell people no when they ask you for a hug,” or “If you don’t hug them, you’ll get a spanking.” Here’s an idea of what the child understands about their ability to set boundaries: Option 1: “I hear you. If you feel uncomfortable showing someone affection, I will respect your preference.” Option 2: “Your boundaries are not important to me, and I know what’s best for you.” Option 3: “You will be punished for having preferences. Don’t embarrass your parents. Other people’s feelings are more important than your own.” To raise healthy children, it’s essential to allow them to have healthy boundaries. This can happen when we allow them to have a preference as to what they eat, what they wear, who they like, how they feel, and who they allow in their physical space.