15 Now What? Your wellness hinges on your boundaries. The first time I went to therapy was in grad school. Like most people, I showed up to therapy with issues such as relationship problems, anxiety, and work-life-balance issues. I had no clue what to call the issues in my relationships with others. All I knew was that people were always trying to make me feel bad, guilt-tripping me for setting boundaries such as “I can’t loan you money anymore,” “When you borrow my car, put gas in it,” or “I can’t babysit for you because I have class.” I was constantly frustrated and resentful because the people in my life were always asking for something and never willing to show up for me. After several sessions, my therapist gently told me to grab a copy of Boundaries: Where You End and I Begin by Anne Katherine. With the help of the therapist and the book, I started to feel better about saying no and asking for what I needed. Depending on whom I’m asking, I still sometimes feel odd when making a request. But I do it anyway, because ultimately I feel better when I have healthy boundaries in my relationships. I’d rather deal with the discomfort in the short term than resentment and frustration in the long term. In healthy relationships, it’s okay, rational, and safe to state your boundaries. It goes both ways, however. You can have them, and the other party may also have them. For example, your boss may have a boundary that you show up five minutes early to meetings, and you may have one that you don’t work on weekends. Respecting other people’s limits is a beautiful way to leverage respect for your own. When someone implements a new boundary with you, such as “I would like you to put your phone away while we’re having dinner,” the best way to respond is by affirming and upholding the request. Verbally, your response could be “I understand. I will put my phone away.” Then ensure that your phone is put away. After reading this book, you know that when someone implements a boundary, it’s to help them feel safe, happy, and secure in the relationship. These limits aren’t to be taken personally. The second (and my personal favorite) agreement from the book The Four Agreements: A Practical Guide to Personal Freedom, by Don Miguel Ruiz, is “Do not take anything personally.” So whatever happens around you, don’t take it personally. Nothing other people do is because of you. It’s because of themselves. All people live in their own dream and their own mind. Even when words seem personal, such as a direct insult, they really have nothing to do with you. I constantly work with my clients to depersonalize events and interactions with others. When we personalize, we negate the personal story and history of the other people involved. Personalizing assumes that everything is about us. I’m the sort of person, for example, who prefers that people take their shoes off in my house. I believe what we carry on our shoes shouldn’t be brought indoors, and it means less mopping for me. In the early days of my rule, several people questioned my practice. “Why do I have to take my shoes off?” But my rule isn’t about them. It certainly wasn’t a comment on their choice of footwear. The same is true of your boundaries and the people who ask you to honor theirs. Without questioning someone, you can agree to the request or suffer the consequences of not accepting it. But remember, you can’t determine your consequences. If your boundary is in direct conflict with someone else’s, it’s essential to evaluate which is healthy and will be most helpful for the relationship. Remember, rigid boundaries are not healthy. Boundaries are established in two parts: (1) verbally communicating them to others, and (2) taking action, whether implementing consequences or removing yourself from interactions with people who won’t or don’t respect your boundaries. After you’ve done all you can, the ultimate boundary might be to end an unhealthy relationship. This is an unfortunate but sometimes unavoidable circumstance. When you choose to end a relationship because it’s no longer viable, remember that you tried. In your effort to repair the relationship, you offered solutions that could have worked. It’s possible that if the situation changes, you can make up with the other person. Here are a few tips to consider when rekindling relationships: What do you expect to be different? Has the situation/person truly changed? What is the evidence that the person/situation is different? Are you well matched with the other person, or are you merely fixated on the relationship working out? If nothing has changed, are you willing to repeat what you experienced before? Hoping a relationship will improve without assessing it realistically will land you back in a similar or worse situation than before. At first, setting your boundaries may be uncomfortable. You might feel riddled with guilt. You might question if you’re doing the right thing. But set them anyway. Push past the discomfort, and do it even while you feel afraid. You’re challenging yourself to be healthier and to have healthier relationships. Ambivalence is a part of the process, and it’s perfectly natural to feel insecure while trying something new. Then, once you start setting boundaries, stay the course, because consistency is the most crucial part of the process. Remember: there is no such thing as guilt-free boundary setting. If you want to minimize (not eliminate) guilt, change the way you think about the process. Stop thinking about boundaries as mean or wrong; start to believe that they’re a nonnegotiable part of healthy relationships, as well as a self-care and wellness practice. Creating healthy boundaries is how you ensure that you’re happy and well in your relationships and in life. For them to stay implemented, be clear about them verbally and through your actions. Remember that when someone doesn’t agree with or understand your boundaries, they may push back, question, test your limits, ignore, or ghost you. No matter what, don’t stop setting them. Persevere with the awareness that your boundaries are not for people to like. They’re for you to remain healthy in your relationships. They’re a way for you to set ground rules for yourself and others. And they’re useful in all areas of life: technology, work, your relationship with yourself, and your relationships with others. So it’s okay to have boundaries and to communicate them assertively. Only with boundaries can you peacefully coexist with others. Situations, relationships, and people struggle to survive without boundaries. Here are just a few of the benefits: People with boundaries sleep better. People with boundaries experience less burnout. People with boundaries have healthier relationships that tend to last longer. People with boundaries experience less stress. People with boundaries feel more joyful. People with boundaries benefit from the short- and long-term value of setting them. Thank you so much for your willingness to be brave and to change. I promise that the journey toward healthier boundaries is worth the discomfort of setting them. Set your boundaries, knowing that you are improving your life, not harming others. Self-Assessment Quiz 1. “I say yes to a person when I want to say no.” A. Yes, I do that often. B. I say no and tell people why I’m saying no so that they don’t ask me anymore. C. I usually say no without apologizing or lying about it. 2. “I feel like I’m constantly having to save people close to me and fix their problems.” A. No, I don’t get involved in other people’s issues. B. Yes, often. C. No, I know my limitations and offer what I can, when I can. 3. “I regularly find myself sucked into pointless fighting or debating.” A. Yes. B. No, I don’t experience that. C. No, I try to keep people at a distance. 4. “I loan money to friends or family out of feelings of pity, guilt, obligation, or being threatened.” A. Yes. B. No, I loan money with clear expectations of when I’d like to be paid back. C. No, I don’t trust people and/or I want to hold on to every penny I earn. 5. “I frequently feel stressed about work.” A. Yes. B. No, I never think about work. When I’m off, I check out and don’t care what happens. C. No, I turn off work notifications and ignore calls, texts, or emails. I try to be present with my friends/family/self once I’m home. There are some situations when I might be a little flexible (in case of emergencies or during a big project), but I make sure I don’t get sucked into it for too long. 6. “I think I spend too much time on social media.” A. Yes. B. No, I enjoy checking in on social media once in a while but don’t get lost in it. C. I log on to my social media account for work on specific days and times. Then I log out of the app on my phone. 7. “I feel guilty when I say no to someone.” A. Yes. B. No. C. No, I don’t care what people think. I’m annoyed/angry/frustrated when they ask me for things. 8. “I get roped into activities or obligations that I don’t want to do.” A. Yes. B. No. C. No, people know not to ask me to do things. 9. “I don’t trust people.” A. True. B. Not true of all people. C. No, I trust everyone, and sometimes that causes problems for me. 10. “I share too much personal information too soon.” A. Yes. B. No. C. I don’t trust people enough to share personal information. 11. “I’m able to hear no from people and not take it personally.” A. Yes. B. No, I tend to take it personally. C. I don’t usually ask people for help. I don’t think they’ll do it right, or I can’t trust them. 12. “I fail to speak up when I’m treated badly.” A. True. B. No, I cut people off, I cuss people out, or I gossip about them. C. No, I’m able to tell people how I feel. 13. “I feel guilty for dedicating time to myself.” A. No, I know I need to take care of myself in order to take care of others. “You can’t pour from an empty cup.” B. Yes. C. No, I prioritize my own needs over everyone else’s. 14. “I apologize for things when they’re not my fault.” A. No, things aren’t typically my fault. B. Yes. C. No, I apologize when I’ve done something I’m responsible for and know I’ve hurt someone. 15. “I feel scattered and stressed because I have a million things to do and not enough time.” A. Yes. B. Honestly, I don’t have a lot going on. Life is quiet because I don’t have a lot of friends or commitments. C. No, I’ve learned to say no, outsource, delegate, or ask for help to avoid feeling scattered or stressed. 16. “I don’t speak up when I have something important to share.” A. Yes. B. No, I know that my ideas and input are just as important as everyone else’s. C. No, in fact, I find myself silencing others at work or not giving them a chance to speak up. Answer Key See which type of boundaries show up for you the most. 1. A. Porous, B. Rigid, C. Healthy 2. A. Rigid, B. Porous, C. Healthy 3. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 4. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 5. A. Porous, B. Rigid, C. Healthy 6. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 7. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 8. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 9. A. Rigid, B. Healthy, C. Porous 10. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid 11. A. Healthy, B. Porous, C. Rigid 12. A. Porous, B. Rigid, C. Healthy 13. A. Healthy, B. Porous, C. Rigid 14. A. Rigid, B. Porous, C. Healthy 15. A. Porous, B. Rigid, C. Healthy 16. A. Porous, B. Healthy, C. Rigid Created by Nedra Tawwab and Kym Ventola Commonly Asked Questions What’s a good boundary for a toxic mother that you aren’t ready to cut off? When you’re aware that a relationship is unhealthy but you aren’t ready to leave that relationship, you can maintain self-boundaries around how you choose to engage with the other person. Boundary suggestions: Consider speaking to your mother less often. Instead of daily, try a few times a week or once a week. Limit the length of the conversations. An easy way to do this could be creating a hard out, such as talking to your mother on the way to an appointment. You’ll have to end the call when you arrive at your destination. Respond when you’re ready and willing to talk, not every single time your mother calls or texts. Is it necessary to explain to a friend or family member why you’re creating distance or that you want to cut them off? You know your people best. Some will listen while you explain, and some will attack you or defend themselves. Be mindful of the type of person you’re addressing before deciding to talk about issues. If the situation is likely to become volatile, it may not be in your best interest to speak to the person face-to-face. Perhaps sharing your desires via text is best. When possible, try to slowly distance yourself from them, as this is often the most cordial way to leave a relationship. How can I deal with my friend who always complains about work? You could set boundaries as to how often you talk to your friend about certain topics. It’s extremely important to consider how you might be inadvertently inviting your friend to talk more about their issues. Consider this: 1. Do you seem interested in the topic? For example, bringing up work might give the impression that you want to hear about the topic. 2. Do you offer your friend advice? 3. Have you tried redirecting your friend to a different subject? 4. Have you ever suggested that your friend speak to a professional or higher-up at work about the concerns? 5. Is your friend aware that you find the conversations emotionally draining? If not, change the conversation to a lighter topic. How can I be a support to a friend who won’t go to therapy? You can decide how much you will listen to and how you’re able to help your friend. Choose to remain in your role as a friend, not a therapist. Let your friend know that there are specific topics you don’t feel comfortable addressing. Continue to suggest therapy to your friend, and let them know why you think they’ll benefit. Some people have deep wounds that friends cannot help them resolve. How do I explain that I can’t loan my family any more money? When you explain your boundaries, people are allowed to refute them. Just say, “No.” “I’m not able to help you.” “Perhaps, I can help you with some resources.” “I can’t help; have you explored other options?” How do I set boundaries with my son without hurting his feelings? Someone set boundaries with you, and you’re okay. Set yours, knowing that you are doing it with love. Boundaries provide structure for your child. How do I stop feeling guilty? Change the narrative from “Everything is my fault” to “I am not responsible for everything that happens.” Ridding yourself of guilt is saying you want to rid yourself of emotions. You have had to deal with all emotions, including jealousy, happiness, and guilt. The more you focus on the guilt and try to stop it, the longer it will linger. Just feel. Don’t judge what you feel. Acknowledgments Before I knew what boundaries were, I developed mental limitations around things I thought were inappropriate or things that didn’t feel right. Eventually, I learned the word for those limitations was “boundaries.” Through a series of small, brave acts, I started the work of setting and keeping boundaries. I’m deeply grateful for the process and the unfolding of the power of healthy boundaries. Thank you to God for revealing to me why my life has unfolded the way it has, giving me life experiences that would allow me to live as my highest self, and for helping me form my life into words for others to receive. Thank you to my husband for listening to my vision for this book, dreaming with me, and for encouraging me to take the time to focus on writing. Thank you to my two daughters, who revealed to me the boundaries needed to be a parent. Thank you to my sister-friend Erica for our deep conversations about boundaries and for pushing me to be more of myself. Thank you to my Morning Mastermind crew—Racheal, Rebecca, and Monica—for being my cheerleading squad. I have so many wonderful friends—Talaya, Delesa, and others—who throughout this process wrote me beautiful cards, sent me gifts, and made me laugh; thank you. Thank you to all my clients who revealed my passion for helping people create boundaries. Thank you to my community on Instagram for encouraging me to create, always supporting my content, and helping me take my work to new heights. Every single day, I’m privileged to do something I love and help others. Thank you, Laura Lee Mattingly (my agent), for helping me navigate the publishing world and for pushing me (quickly) through writing a proposal. This project was made easy because Marian Lizzi (my editor) believed in this work from the very beginning and her thoughtfulness about conveying my message helped me shape this book. Thanks to her team, Jess Morphew (art director), and Rachel Ayotte (editorial assistant) for guiding me through this process. My attorney, Patrice Perkins, helped me consider the many aspects of my brand. And my assistant, Shaunsie Reed, cheered me on and reviewed my first draft. This book came to fruition because of the helpers I’ve found along the way. I am grateful for the support of my therapist, who encouraged me to write this book and highlighted my triumphs of being boundaried. Thank you, Mom and Dad, for delivering me into the world. And the biggest THANK YOU is to everyone who read this book. You are brave and you are boundaried. Further Reading Allan, Patrick. “How to Deal with Chronic Complainers.” Lifehacker, October 8, 2019. https://lifehacker.com/how-to-deal-with-chronic-complainers-1668185689. Beck, Julie. “How Friendships Change in Adulthood.” The Atlantic, October 22, 2015. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/10/how-friendships-change-over- time-in-adulthood/411466/. Bourne, Edward. Anxiety and Phobia Workbook, 4th ed. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications, 2006. Charles Schwab. Modern Wealth Survey. May 2019. https://content.schwab.com/web/retail/public/about-schwab/Charles-Schwab-2019- Modern-Wealth-Survey-findings-0519-9JBP.pdf. Clear, James. Atomic Habits. New York: Avery Publications, 2018. Coleman, Jackie, and John Coleman. “The Upside of Downtime.” Harvard Business Review, December 6, 2012. https://hbr.org/2012/12/the-upside-of-downtime. Derald Wing Sue, “Microaggressions: More Than Just Race,” Psychology Today, November 17, 2010. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/microaggressions-in-everyday- life/201011/microaggressions-more-just-race. Emery, Lea Rose. “The First Year of Marriage Is Tough, No Matter How You Spin It.” Brides, November 2019. https://www.brides.com/story/the-first-year-of-marriage-is- tough. Eyal, Nir. Indistractable: How to Control Your Attention and Choose Your Life. Dallas: Ben Bella Books, 2019. Higgs, Michaela. “Go Ahead and Complain. It Might Be Good for You.” New York Times, January 9, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/06/smarter-living/how-to- complain-.html. Horsman, Jenny. But I’m Not a Therapist: Furthering Discussion About Literacy Work with Survivors of Trauma. Toronto: Canadian Congress for Learning Opportunities for Women, 1997. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED461078 June, Sophia. “Instagram Therapists Are the New Instagram Poets.” New York Times, June 19, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/26/style/instagram-therapists.html. Kantor, Jodi, and Megan Twohey. “Harvey Weinstein Paid Off Sexual Harassment Accusers for Decades.” New York Times, October 5, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/05/us/harvey-weinstein-harassment- allegations.html. Katherine, Anne. Where You End and I Begin—How to Recognize and Set Healthy Boundaries. Center City, MN: Hazelden, 1994. Mechling, L. “How to End a Friendship.” New York Times, June 14, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/14/opinion/sunday/how-to-end-a-friendship.html. Milchan, A., S. Reuther, J. F. Lawton, G. Marshall, R. Gere, J. Roberts, R. Bellamy et al. Pretty Woman. Buena Vista Pictures, 1990. Morrish, E. “Reflections on the Women, Violence, and Adult Education Project.” Focus on Basics 5, issue C, February 2002. http://www.gse.harvard.edu/~ncsall/fob/2002/morrish.html [inactive]. Rosenwasser, Penny. “Tool for Transformation: Cooperative Inquiry as a Process for Healing from Internalized Oppression.” Adult Education Research Conference, pp. 392– 396. Vancouver: University of British Columbia, 2000. http://www.edst.educ.ubc.ca/aerc/2000/rosenwasserp1-web.htm [inactive]. Tawwab, Nedra. “The Question I’m Asked Most as a Therapist—and My Answer.” Shine, November 2019. https://advice.shinetext.com/articles/the-question-im-asked-most-as-a- therapist-and-my-answer/. “Trauma Affects Trust in the World as a Beneficial Place, the Meaningfulness of Life, and Self-Worth.” Horsman 1997; Morrish 2002; Rosenwasser 2000. Tsukayama, H. “Teens Spend Nearly Nine Hours Every Day Consuming Media.” Washington Post, November 5, 2015. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the- switch/wp/2015/11/03/teens-spend-nearly-nine-hours-every-day-consuming-media/. Vanzant, Iyanla. The Value in the Valley: A Black Woman’s Guide Through Life’s Dilemmas. New York: Fireside, 1995. Webb, Jonice. Running on Empty. New York: Morgan James, 2012. Williams, A. “Why Is It Hard to Make Friends Over 30?” New York Times, July 13, 2012. https://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/15/fashion/the-challenge-of-making-friends-as-an- adult.html.