with their family. If your partner hasn’t established an adult child role with their parents, you may be the person left setting the limits. If you don’t set them with your in-laws, however, you may start to resent your spouse for not standing up for your relationship or for being a pushover. Speaking to your in-laws about boundaries should be done only once you’ve given your partner the chance to speak on your behalf. Be kind and gentle here. Setting boundaries is tough work, and setting them with family is the hardest area for many. Your partner is struggling with something that’s more than likely very difficult and scary. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your In-Laws They make your special family events (such as a wedding) about them. They gossip about you to their family members. They don’t like you and have told you as much. They openly share their negative views of you with your children. They question your parenting style. They make decisions for your family. They encourage your spouse or kids to keep secrets from you. They hear essential things happening with your partner before you hear about it. They give you gifts with strings attached. They give your kids things they know you wouldn’t want them to have. They don’t respect the way you parent your kids. Boundaries with your in-laws look like Clearly stating your parenting philosophy Asking your spouse to support you in a boundary you set with your in-laws Directly asking your partner to implement a boundary with their parent Not accepting gifts if you know expectations are attached Being transparent with your partner and children that it isn’t okay to keep secrets Boundaries with your in-laws sound like To In-Law “We want our children to speak openly with us. Do not advise them to keep secrets from us.” “I know that you care about our family, and I understand that you want to be involved. But it’s important for us to figure out how to navigate on our own.” “We’re grateful that you’re willing to help us financially. When you do so, please do it from the kindness of your heart, not with the expectation that we have to do something in return.” “The way you parented seems different from what we’re doing with our children. We ask that you respect the way we raise our kids by adhering to our wishes for them.” To Partner “I know you’re close to your father, but don’t discuss the personal details of our sex life with him.” “When you share things with your parents first, it makes me feel left out. I would like to be the first to know what’s happening with you.” “It isn’t okay for you to keep things from me and share them with your parents.” “When I set a boundary with your parents, I’d like you to support me.” Important Reminders Be gentle with your partner as they learn to set boundaries with their parents. It’s okay to share your boundary with your in-law if your partner doesn’t do so. Don’t allow boundary violations to go on too long without intervening. Boundaries with Other Family Members “My sister hates all my friends. Whenever I invite her anywhere with my friends, she finds a reason to have an issue with them. It’s been this way since we went away to separate colleges. It’s almost like she wants to be my only person.” Monica was tired of trying to include her sister in plans only to have her sister ruin the moment. At her twenty-third birthday party, her sister had an argument with Monica’s college roommate. Afterward, she spent most of her time at the party trying to console her sister. Much like your parents, your other family members know how to push your buttons. Whether it’s your siblings, cousins, aunts, uncles, or grandparents, they may want a prominent role in your life. It’s okay for them to have a part, but you have to guide them on how you want them to show up. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Other Family Members They use guilt trips as a way to get you to do what they want. They share personal stories that cause you to feel embarrassed. They are involved in whom you choose to date. They have no filter in the opinions they share about you. They gossip to you about other family members. They share your personal business with other family members. They push you to live a lifestyle unlike the one you want to live. You have codependent relationships with them. Your relationships are enmeshed. Boundaries with your other family members look like Allowing personal distance Attending family events because you want to, not because you’re pressured to Not allowing family members to comment on your dating status, weight, or any area of your life that you aren’t comfortable discussing Identifying what you want in your relationships with family Creating an experience that may be different from the family norm Boundaries with your other family members sound like “We aren’t as close as we used to be, and I see that it’s impacting our relationship. I will not invite you to go out with my friends if you act jealous and make the night about you.” “We don’t agree on politics. We should stop discussing politics at family gatherings.” “I know you’re concerned that I’m happy in my relationships. However, I don’t want you giving me dating advice or asking me about my dating life.” “I’m very concerned about [insert family member’s name], but I will not enable them by helping pay their bills again.” “I don’t want to be in the middle of family disputes. I will no longer be the mediator.” Important Reminders You may be the first in your family to set boundaries; remember that doing something different may elicit an unwelcome response. Setting boundaries will shift how other people see you. Boundaries with Co-Parents “How can I survive the rest of my kids’ lives with my narcissistic ex?” Jason asked me one day during a session. He shared two children with Jessica, who talked negatively about him to the kids. She also left discipline up to Jason, thereby making him appear to be the bad guy. He watched her manipulate the children by telling them how she wished she could have them more of the time, even though she’d been adamant about fifty-fifty custody. Jason began to find it harder and harder to communicate with Jessica because she repeatedly told him that he was the one at fault for the divorce’s impact on the children. The term “co-parent” applies to coupled or uncoupled parents. Even when couples are married or separated but mostly amicable, it can be challenging to raise children with two different sets of beliefs as to how to go about it. Parents may unknowingly affect their kids negatively by having a contentious relationship with each other. But when we have children with someone, we’re forever connected to them. I know it’s hard to co-parent with an ex who is difficult, but it’s more comfortable when healthy boundaries are in place. Signs That You Need Healthier Boundaries with Your Co-Parent: They talk about you to your children in a negative way. Decisions negatively impact the child because you and the other parent can’t agree. Children witness name-calling, verbal disputes, emotional abuse, or domestic violence. Children are made to pick a side (choose who’s right or wrong or the parent they’d like to be closest to). Children are used as pawns in disputes. Boundaries with co-parents look like Discussing issues together before talking to the kids Honoring a custody agreement if one is in place Not sharing inappropriate information with children about the other parent Creating rules about how to argue in front of the children Using a mediator if issues can’t be resolved amicably Assigning a pick-up and drop-off location when sending children to the other parent’s home Boundaries with co-parents sound like “While we don’t see eye to eye on this, I wonder what might be a reasonable compromise.” “I think it’s best if a mediator helps us decide what’s fair in terms of custody and child support.” “Our kids shouldn’t see us fighting. I won’t have an inappropriate conversation in front of them.” “Please don’t speak about me and what you think of me in front of the kids.” “The children are impacted by what they see. Let’s show them how to be in healthy relationships even when we disagree with someone.” Important Reminders Through observing your relationship, you are teaching your kids how to exist in their own relationships. Children want to feel safe. You can only do your part. If you set a boundary, you must honor it. Kids greatly benefit from parents getting along. Boundaries with Your Children Children under the age of eighteen aren’t emotionally capable of handling adult problems. Even when they’re mature for their age, it isn’t appropriate to share adult stressors with them. Of course, as they get older, they’re capable of handling more, along with explanations to help them understand more adult concepts. Having boundaries helps children feel safer. Despite their opposition, they benefit from rules and structure, and limits are essential to teach them how to treat others and have healthy relationships. I will use the term “age-appropriate” several times to describe a boundary’s appropriateness for different age groups. When my clients are unsure about what’s age-appropriate, I ask them to look beyond what they were exposed to as children. It could be that their own experiences were inappropriate for their age. Instead, I request that they consider TV ratings, age suggestions for specific toys, and what a doctor might say about kids safely engaging in certain things. These suggestions shouldn’t be taken as hard rules, but it helps to strongly consider why they might be in place for a particular age group. Signs That You Need Boundaries with Your Children They have no rules. Your parenting style is permissive. Your children are used as confidants. Your parenting style is punitive only. They are allowed to speak to others inappropriately. Boundaries with your children look like Setting an age-appropriate bedtime for small kids Ensuring they have healthy food options available Discussing feelings and emotions in an age-appropriate manner Not using a child as a confidant Not expecting kids to be the caregiver for younger children in the home Teaching kids to take care of themselves in an age-appropriate manner Exposing kids to age-suitable entertainment Monitoring online and social media usage Boundaries with your children sound like “You have school in the morning. At nine o’clock, it’s time for bed.” “Have you had any water today? No more juice until you have a few cups of water.” “I’m the parent; I will take care of your brother.” “Please go to your room; I need to talk to Grandma alone.” “What you’re watching is inappropriate. I’m changing settings to filter out unsuitable content.” “It’s okay to feel angry. What are some ways to behave when you feel angry?” Important Reminders Even when kids seem mature for their age, it’s essential to allow them to stay in a kid’s reality. Children don’t need to know the details of everything that happens with adults. Kids feel safe when limits are in place consistently. Teaching Kids How to Have Healthy Boundaries Adults often forget that children need boundaries, too. The forgetfulness is evidenced by adults blatantly either saying or acting as though “You’re a kid, so no one cares about your feelings.” Adults need to remember that kids Have feelings and benefit significantly from being allowed to explore and express those feelings Are impacted by the things that adults expose them to Are affected by how adults respond to their problems Hold memories about how adults made them feel Aren’t companions or confidants Lack the mental capacity to appropriately manage adult issues, no matter what their behavior reflects Have boundaries Most of the adults I work with can clearly remember how their boundaries were violated in childhood and how they still struggle to repair the damage from those violations. They also struggle to incorporate healthy boundaries in their adult lives. Children must learn that having boundaries is healthy for them. Kids are aware that they can’t demand their wishes be respected, so they request that adults hear them when they make small bids for healthy boundaries. Boundaries that a child might set sound like “Can you please stop saying mean things about Dad?” “You never pay attention to me. Why don’t you just listen?” “I don’t want to give you a hug.” “I need you to put down your phone and spend more time with me.” “I don’t like talking to Grandma; she’s always mean to me.” It’s important to listen to children when they make requests like these and to honor their boundaries whenever possible. — S                   family is particularly challenging. For years, your family has grown accustomed to you acting a certain way and playing a particular role. Change becomes necessary when you no longer want a situation to stay the way it has been. As difficult as it might seem, improving boundaries with your family is likely to create better relationships with them. Exercise Grab your journal or a separate sheet of paper to complete the following exercise. How do you feel about setting boundaries with your family? Who in your family do you think would be the most receptive to your boundaries? Who in your family do you think would be the least receptive to your boundaries? Name two boundaries that you’d like to implement with your family. What actions or follow-up might be necessary for your family to adhere to your boundaries? 11 Romantic Relationships We don’t naturally fall into perfect relationships; we create them. Malcolm and Nicole had been dating for a year before they decided to move in together. Then, after living together for two years, they found themselves constantly arguing about household duties, how much time they spent together, and the future of their relationship. Often during arguments, Malcolm would get so upset that he’d leave the house for hours. And when he returned, he’d spend the next few days giving Nicole the cold shoulder. In our sessions, Nicole cried about their poor communication. She knew that she and Malcolm loved each other deeply, but she couldn’t figure out why they argued so much. Meanwhile, Malcolm described Nicole as “a nag.” Instead of directly saying what she wanted, she was known to hint about her needs in a not-so-subtle way. This annoyed Malcolm. When irritated, he would ignore her passive-aggressive requests. Nicole’s most significant issue was that she wanted to be married. She never expected to live with Malcolm for two years without at least becoming engaged. She had become resentful, and during arguments she frequently brought up the marriage issue. Malcolm, on the other hand, wasn’t sure if he wanted to be married. It wasn’t until they’d lived together for six months that Nicole started to talk about it. Malcolm shrugged off her concerns in a way that never resolved their issues. It was clear that these two needed help getting to the root of their problems and talking through the communication issues they commonly faced during disagreements. They thought I would referee their disputes about who was right or who should change, but to their surprise, we talked about the agreements they made with each other early in the relationship. Beyond “I love you; you love me,” Malcolm and Nicole had never talked about what each considered acceptable behavior in the relationship. Hence, Malcolm walked out during arguments. They hadn’t discussed each person’s expectations. Yet Nicole wanted to be married, while Malcolm was unsure. For three years, they existed with unspoken boundaries and anger about violations that were unknown to the other person. It was clear to me from the beginning that the couple had boundary issues in their relationship. Back to Basics In Chapter 1, I wrote about signs that you need healthier boundaries. In this case, Nicole was resentful, and her resentment was starting to make itself known in the couple’s daily interactions. Instead of communicating her needs clearly and directly, she often expressed her needs in a passive-aggressive way. She’d say, for example, “When you get back from your mom’s house, I hope you have time to cook dinner like you said you would.” If she was assertive, she might say something like “Be home by five o’clock so you can cook dinner for us, or grab something while you’re out.” Communicating her need would likely prevent an argument, but instead she set up a scenario that routinely ended in an argument. In Chapter 2, we talked about what happens when we don’t set boundaries. Nicole was burned out, so she’d say things like “I’m tired of being the one to ____” and “I’m always considering what Malcolm wants.” She felt as though she was giving a lot and getting very little in return. Malcolm wanted peace, and when his peace was disrupted by intense arguments, he set a boundary by leaving the house. In Chapter 3, we addressed what holds people back from setting boundaries. Nicole didn’t want to feel guilty for being direct about what she wanted. Also, she feared that Malcolm would be unwilling to honor her requests. Since they didn’t talk issues through, however, the couple couldn’t know if getting married was an option for their relationship. In Chapter 6, we detailed ways to identify and communicate boundaries. By helping Nicole and Malcolm communicate theirs, we gave the relationship a reasonable chance of continuing on a healthy path. As we talked through their needs, we came to the following conclusions: Nicole’s Needs A clear understanding of the future of the relationship with the hope of one day getting married; domestic support Malcolm’s Needs Improve how issues are identified, and address them with more meaningful communication instead of explosive disputes — F    , I        Nicole state what she wanted clearly in a way that Malcolm could understand. To her surprise, Malcolm heard her and said he would immediately honor direct requests for more support at home. We spoke about direct ways to ask for assistance, such as “I need your help with ____.” “Be home by five o’clock, because I’d like us to have dinner together.” “I scheduled a date night for us to spend some time together.” When they made clear requests, the couple noticed a reduction in the frequency and intensity of their arguments. For the BIG conversation about marriage, Malcolm admitted to having anxiety about it because of his parents’ dysfunctional relationship and other marriages he’d witnessed. They began to talk through issues and barriers, and they compromised with a new set of agreements for their relationship. Relationship Agreements In every relationship, we operate based on an explicit or implicit set of agreements (rules and boundaries). Based on our agreements, our relationships vary from person to person. In one relationship, we may find ourselves more argumentative; and in others, arguing isn’t an acceptable practice. It isn’t acceptable because at some point, an explicit or implicit agreement was made that it would be inappropriate in that relationship. For example, you might have such a spoken or unspoken agreement about arguments with your boss. Examples of Explicit Agreements with Healthy Boundaries “Don’t raise your voice at me.” “I want an open relationship, where we discuss other partners with each other.” “I want to meet your friends.” Examples of Implicit Agreements with Unhealthy Boundaries You assume that people know how to conduct themselves in a relationship with you. You assume that people will meet your needs without your telling them what those needs are. You assume that people automatically know your expectations. Instead, let’s assume that people know only what you tell them, honor only what you request, and can’t read your mind. Mindful Relationship Habits Define what it means to be in healthy relationships. Assess why you’re in relationships with certain people. Notice your energy while engaging with people. Do what feels right for you. Make peace with not having a relationship that everyone agrees with. Challenge societal norms about what relationships should look like. Discover what makes you happy in your relationships. Honor your feelings by making healthy choices. Setting Expectations Set expectations at any point in your relationship, but the sooner, the better. If you want to be married, it’s essential to know if the person you’re dating also wants to be married. If you don’t want to have kids, it’s necessary to know if the person you’re dating wants to have kids. From this space of clear knowing, you can create intentional agreements in your relationships that provide clarity. It’s fun at the beginning of a relationship, and we often seem easy to please. But the most pleasing thing you can do is be honest with yourself and the person you’re dating. Also, to save yourself time and a lot of heartaches, believe people when they say things like “I don’t want a serious relationship,” “I don’t think I’m the marrying type,” “All my exes said I was crazy,” or “I can’t see myself with a kid.” If you’re okay with these statements, you may be equally matched. But if you want the opposite, find someone else who wants the same things. Otherwise, you’ll spend most of the relationship trying to persuade the other person to want what you want. Rarely does someone change their mind to appease another person, at least not for long. After a few dates with someone, it’s an excellent time to start talking about your expectations. The biggest fear about being honest is that you might scare people away. But this is true only if they aren’t interested in what you present. Therefore, as much as it might hurt, scaring them off is a sign that you’re mismatched. At the beginning of a relationship, it’s vital to know What is the plan for the relationship? Do you have similar values? Are there any issues that are deal-breakers? How will you handle disputes? What is acceptable within the relationship? What unique rules do you want to implement for the relationship? If you’re deep into a relationship where boundaries weren’t discussed up front, get clear about them now, and communicate them to your partner. Based on your feelings about specific issues that have come up between you, you’ll know what areas you need limits in. Watch for resentment, burnout, frustration, settling, uneasiness, and anger. These emotions will guide you directly to where boundaries are needed in your relationship. Poor Communication Is the Leading Cause of Divorce and Breakups I’ve been treating couples as a relationship therapist for fourteen years. The number one reason couples seek therapy is to improve their communication. In fact, I would argue that most relationship issues boil down to communication. If you Google “books for couples,” most of the books will be on this subject. In my years of helping couples, I’m astonished by how often they operate without first discussing the rules of engagement, including what can and can’t happen in the relationship. I’m not talking about what has been appropriate in other relationships, but in the current relationship. What is acceptable and unacceptable? Here are some common areas where communication issues arise: Fidelity Is your relationship monogamous? What does monogamy mean? What does cheating look like? What’s the consequence if someone cheats? Finances How will you manage your money in the relationship? Who is responsible for paying which bill? What are your short-term and long-term financial goals? Will you have joint or separate bank and brokerage accounts? Do either or both of you have financial issues? How will you address financial issues if they arise?