FOREWORD Conflict is a part of everyone’s life; we can’t eliminate it. Nor would we necessarily want to–for new insights and growth can emerge from well-managed conflict. Managing conflict is something we all can do on our own, especially if we make use of techniques developed for that purpose. Healthy conflict management is a necessary part of ministry, family life, work–even play. The popularity of this book since it first appeared in 1984 is confirmation of the need for every individual to learn how best to deal with conflict. The two-part goal of Discover Your Conflict Management Style remains the same as in the original version: 1. To help persons learn about the range of appropriate conflict-management strategies and when each works best. 2. To help individuals identify their own preferred styles of conflict management, and to consider using other styles as well. What has changed in this revision is the formulation of some of the questions this resource includes to approach the two-part goal. As author Speed Leas has continued to lead workshops and conduct research on conflict management, he has had the opportunity to observe how a great variety of people use the book. The result is an even clearer and more pointed instrument than in the original. This is a “self-help” book in the best sense of the term. It is a tool providing an entire procedure for the reader to learn about managing conflict in his or her own life. You can administer the instrument to yourself and learn your own results: the style of management that is most natural to you, and why others may seem less appealing. The manual helps you interpret your results and learn when it is most useful to employ various styles of conflict management, as well as what their likely outcomes might be. It is reassuring the learn about yourself in this regard, and to realize that there are more ways of approaching conflict than you might have experienced. You can use this information to improve relations in all facets of your life. As Speed Leas points out, the appropriate time to use this resource is not in the midst of a conflict–but at a time when you can contemplate and digest the information for future use. You might set aside a period of time during which you administer the instrument, and then ponder the additional resources for interpreting it and putting the results to good use. In this revision, you will benefit from the author’s most recent insights in conflict management for religious groups. Even if you have used the earlier version, you will want to work with this one as well. There is probably no more or less conflict today than there has ever been in human relations–but through the accumulated wisdom of experts like Leas, we become ever more capable of using it in healthy, growth-producing ways. Linda-Marie Delloff Director of Publishing