RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 89 Jesus was very clear that his followers could be the source of not only misdirection, but also harm to those they serve. Jesus continues in Luke 17:3-4: “Be on your guard! If another disciple sins, you must rebuke the offender, and if there is repentance, you must forgive. And if the same person sins against you seven times a day, and turns back to you seven times and says, ‘I repent’, you must forgive.” Jesus mandates confrontation of any follower who sins by causing harm, and forgiveness is tied to repentance by the abuser. (See “On Forgiveness, Repentance, and Reconciliation” below) There is no question that the prophets call leadership to repent: “Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, all of you according to your ways, says the Lord God. Repent, and turn from all your transgressions; otherwise, iniquity will be your ruin. Cast away from you all the transgressions that you have committed against me, and get yourselves a new heart and new spirit! Why will you die, House of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of anyone, says the Lord God. Turn, then, and live!” Ezekiel 18:30-32 (NRSV) For victims, God promises justice in the parable of the widow in Luke 18:1-8 and also in the Psalms. “For God did not despise or abhor the affliction of the afflicted; God did not hide God’s face from me, but heard when I cried out... The poor shall eat and be satisfied; those who seek God shall praise God. May your hearts live forever!” Psalm 22:24, 26 (NRSV— inclusive) “For you have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling. I will walk before God in the land of the living.” Psalm 116:8-9 (NRSV) There is also a word of caution for the faith community, calling us to account for our fear and inadequate responses to harm among us. “Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician here? Why then has the health of my poor people not been restored?” Jeremiah 8:22 (NRSV) “They have treated the wound of my people carelessly, saying, ‘Peace, peace,’ when there is no peace. They acted shamefully, they committed abomination; yet they were not at all ashamed, they did not know how to blush.” Jeremiah 8:11-12 (NRSV) “... but let those who boast, boast in this, that they understand and know me, that I am God; I act with steadfast love, justice, and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight, says our God.” Jeremiah 9:24 (NRSV) The Necessity of Justice-Making One of the theological/ethical aspects that is frequently overlooked by spiritual communities is the practical importance of justice-making in response to spiritual leader misconduct and abuse. Our best teachers about this are survivors of misconduct or abuse by spiritual leaders. When asked, they quite often know what they need for their own healing, and they also intuitively know that their spiritual community should be able to provide it. They are correct. SECTION 3 90 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE When survivors ask for things like: • “I want to tell my story to the Bishop.” • “I want my abuser held accountable and never to be able to do this again.” • “I want compensation for my medical and therapy bills.” • “I want to return to seminary and complete my education.” • “I want the community to know what really happened.” • “I want you to listen and not be afraid of me.” • “I want his name taken down off the building honoring him.” They are asking for justice. These are concrete, reasonable responses that we can make, once a complaint is adjudicated, to bring real healing to survivors and their families. As we have listened to hundreds of survivors seeking healing in past years, we began to realize that their needs fell into seven categories listed here. The Elements of Justice-Making 1. Truth-telling The victim-survivor needs to give voice to the reality of the abuse. 2. Acknowledging the violation Someone who matters, like the governing body or board, needs to hear the truth, name the abuse, and condemn it as wrong. 3. Compassion is to suffer with the victim The powers-that-be need to listen to and suffer with the victim. Wait until later for the problem-solving. 4. Protecting the vulnerable The powers-that-be need to take steps to prevent further abuse to the victim and others. 5. Accountability The powers-that-be need to confront the perpetrator and impose negative consequences. This step makes repentance possible for the abuser. 6. Restitution The powers-that-be need to make symbolic restoration of what was taken, to give a tangible means to acknowledge the wrongfulness of the abuse and the harm done, and to bring about healing (e.g. payment for therapy). 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 91 7. Vindication is not vengeance It means to set the victim-survivor free from the suffering caused by the abuse. Some experiences of justice can vindicate the victim-survivor and free them to even consider “forgiveness.” Clearly, in the elements presented here, the spiritual community has a major role to play. This is one place that we frequently, passively drop the ball. We wait... for the victim to go away? For the perpetrator to resign? For the victim to “forgive and forget?” And if we wait long enough, we will be looking at a lawsuit because this is the last recourse for a survivor who expects their spiritual community to actually do something about this betrayal of trust. Few survivors actually experience all these aspects of justice-making. However, what is important is that they experience enough to be able to move forward in their lives and store these memories on their hard drive. This is “approximate justice”; less than they deserve, but enough to experience some vindication and healing. It is up to the spiritual community to do everything it can to make this possible. This is clear in the seven elements; most of them fall to the powers-that-be. This is the work of the spiritual community. We are called to heal the wound deeply. A scar will remain, but fullness of life can be restored. In other words, this isn’t the work of the victim-survivor alone as they finds themselves up against a powerful institution whose agenda may not include them. This is the work of the spiritual community and the institutional bodies that oversee it.3 3 For further discussion, see Marie M. Fortune, Is Nothing Sacred? The Story of a Pastor, the Women He Sexually Abused, and the Congregation He Nearly Destroyed (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 1999), 113-120. SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 93 Basic Guidelines Concerning Policy and Procedures In preparing or revising a policy and procedure statement for your judicatory, seminary, or organization, we urge you to do four things: 1. Revisit your mission statement. This will help you ground your response to complaints of misconduct in the overall mission of your spiritual community. 2. Take the time to reflect together theologically and ethically. As we have suggested above, the values and teachings of our traditions provide primary direction in operationalizing our response to misconduct. 3. Review the options for “What is your Agenda?” and make an intentional choice. 4. Review your polity so that you integrate your procedure into your existing polity and loci of authority within your spiritual community. Effective intervention is based on policies that clearly state 1) the boundaries of ministerial/teaching conduct—what is and what is not appropriate behavior for spiritual leaders in their relationships with congregants, clients, employees, students, and staff members—and 2) fair procedures for investigating allegations, adjudicating formal complaints, and either exonerating or disciplining spiritual leaders who abuse. 1. The purpose of a policy and procedure adopted by a judicatory, congregation, or seminary to address misconduct by a spiritual leader is to provide a mechanism to respond to a complaint of unprofessional and unethical conduct on the part of someone who is credentialed and authorized to function on behalf of that body. The policy and procedure should be fundamentally fair to all parties and should assume good faith on the part of the complainant and innocence on the part of the accused until the matter is investigated and adjudicated. The policy and procedure should then authorize steps to either exonerate the accused or discipline them and to ensure that they are restrained from doing further harm to other people. 2. Policies and procedures should be publicized at the congregational/local and denominational/movement levels in the context of an educational presentation. It is especially important that the policies and procedures for making complaints be publicized periodically and be readily available to community members both in hard copy brochures and on websites. 3. Policies and procedures must be clear enough for church/synagogue/sangha members, who may not be experts on legal or administrative procedures, to be able to understand and to follow. SECTION 3 94 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE A CAUTIONARY NOTE The biggest temptation for judicatories, seminaries, or organizations when faced with a complaint about misconduct is to try to avoid adjudication. This means avoiding making a judgment call as to whether we believe the complaint is true or not true. Here are some of the avoidance strategies we often see (and do not recommend) in policies and implementation: Informal Intervention: Attempt an initial response to “resolve the conflict” between complainant and accused spiritual leader. Remember, in most cases this is not a “conflict,” although it creates conflict. It would be like approaching a burglary where someone broke into your house and took your possessions as a “conflict” between two equal parties. Rather, the complaint is that a spiritual leader violated someone’s boundaries and the judicatory or organization’s policy. The questions for the leadership are 1) did this violation take place, and 2) is this the person who did it? Referral to a Therapist: Ask someone else to decide if this accused spiritual leader is an abuser or not. The same analogy applies: in a burglary, refer the accused to a therapist to answer the question, “Does this person seem capable of being a burglar?” This is not the question at hand; rather, did the violation occur, and is this the person responsible? While therapy and mental health services may be a valuable resource for the accused in general, the issue at hand is about their conduct. Once the complaint is adjudicated, we might consult a therapist with expertise in boundary violations to help assess what the next steps should be. Decide Not to Decide: In a “he said, she said” situation, to simply decide “we don’t have enough evidence.” This is usually decided without any real investigation and translates into taking no action. This is unacceptable. (See “Complaint > Investigation > Adjudication” and “Guidelines for Assessing Evidence” below) 4. The tests of any policy or procedure concerning misconduct or abuse in the ministerial/ teaching relationship should be: • Is it clear, fair, and consistent with the values and mission of the spiritual community it represents? • How does it feel to complainants who may be victims and survivors? Does it communicate a clear understanding of the problem and help bring healing and justice for them? • Does it have the capacity to hold perpetrators accountable? • Does it have the capacity to determine a false allegation and subsequently exonerate the accused spiritual leader? 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 95 5. In order to insure that a policy or procedure measures up to these tests, it is important that survivors (i.e. persons who have experienced abuse by spiritual leaders and are not currently engaged in an active case) be included on any committee charged with writing or revising policy and procedures concerning misconduct in the ministerial/teaching relationship. Their insights can be invaluable. 6. If criminal charges are filed, the judicatory or organization should cooperate with the prosecutor’s investigation. Do not try to shield an accused spiritual leader from investigation. It may be advisable to hold the judicatory procedure until the criminal charges have been resolved. But remember, if the accused is acquitted by the court, this is not a reason to cease ethics investigation or avoid disciplinary action. The evidentiary standard in criminal court is higher than in civil cases and hopefully higher than in your policy. (See “Guidelines for Assessing Evidence”) The misconduct may not have been criminal, but it still may have violated your policy and the spiritual leader in question may still represent a risk to the health and safety of the community. WHEN IN DOUBT, ASK YOURSELF Ultimately, how will our action/inaction bring healing for the survivor(s) and accountability for the offender? How will it help make justice and restore the integrity of the ministerial/teaching relationship? SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 97 Basic Components of Effective Policy and Procedures Procedures for addressing allegations and/or complaints of abuse or misconduct in the ministerial/ teaching relationship must be fair; they must be clear; and they must be followed carefully. Basic components of effective procedures include the following: 1. The “policy” portion should specify the behaviors that are not acceptable in the ministerial/ teaching role. A more general reference, such as “conduct unbecoming the role,” is not adequate. In any case, it is not likely that there will be consensus on what “conduct unbecoming the role” means. This policy should be limited to the denomination’s responsibility for the conduct of spiritual leaders in the ministerial/teaching relationship, i.e. in their professional roles. It is not appropriate to address personal sexual or non-sexual ethical issues in this policy. If you so choose, those issues may be addressed in a separate code of conduct. Language such as the following is preferable: Spiritual leader misconduct is when any person in a ministerial or teaching role of leadership or pastoral counseling (clergy, religious, or lay) engages in harmful behaviors that violate the ministerial or teaching relationship. Violations can include sexual contact, sexual harassment or sexualized behavior with a congregant, client, employee, student, or staff member (adult, teenager, or child), financial irresponsibility or irregularities, violations of confidentiality, use of technology for illegal or harmful purposes, intentional deception or dishonesty including misrepresenting personal qualifications, acts of physical, emotional, spiritual violence or bullying, and gross negligence of ministerial responsibilities. Such misconduct is a violation of the ministerial/teaching relationship in which a person in a position of leadership takes advantage of a vulnerable person. This language both defines the misconduct and asserts it to be an ethics violation. This then becomes the standard against which you would judge a complaint of misconduct. Did the alleged offender engage in this behavior that you have defined to be unethical? 2. Procedures for making complaints should designate a specific person by title or role within the judicatory or organization to whom community members can make their complaints. The procedure should require that in the case of a complaint on behalf of a child, the governing bodies should make an immediate report to the law enforcement. (See Appendix: “A Story of Two Calls: The Intake Process for Misconduct Complaints” by Heather Bond) 3. Procedures must provide for due process in assessing a complaint. “Due process” means that the steps of the procedure are reasonable and fair. The procedure must be unbiased and protect the rights and interests of both the complainant and the accused. 4. Post adjudication. If, after an investigation, the allegations of spiritual leader misconduct are inconclusive or unsubstantiated, steps must be taken to restore the accused leader’s credibility. For SECTION 3 98 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE A CAUTIONARY NOTE Concerns about “due process” can sometimes become a smokescreen for inaction. The purpose of “due process” is to insure that the process is fair and transparent and that the outcome has integrity. Unfortunately, we have seen cases where the understanding of “due process” by the adjudicating body has meant that they allowed the accused spiritual leader to control the process and negotiate the outcome. This clearly favors the accused spiritual leader and rarely leads to a just outcome. The adjudicating body controls the process and finally decides whether someone retains their credentials for ministry/teaching. The other smokescreen that sometimes arises here is the decision, based on “due process,” to not pursue a complaint because it might “damage the reputation” of the accused spiritual leader. The possibility of a false allegation of misconduct faces all of us. As a public figure, it is a risk that comes with the job. If we are falsely accused, we need to know that the procedure, with “due process,” will allow us to defend ourselves and prove our innocence of the charges. Then the spiritual community should provide the means to exonerate the person falsely accused. example, if the spiritual leader chooses, the results of the adjudication could be sent out to the community or published in appropriate media. If the allegations of spiritual leader misconduct are validated, steps must be taken to: • Discipline the offending spiritual leader. (See “Disciplinary Process” below) • Protect and restore survivors, including having the abuser provide restitution where appropriate. • Seek to restore the integrity of the ministry/teaching. • Seek to restore the community in which the offense(s) occurred, including notifying the membership of the findings and the disciplinary action taken and providing education and an opportunity for open discussion. (See “Response to the Community” below) • In the future, only consider restoring the offending minister to professional health if requirements are met. • Ensure that appropriate information regarding the spiritual leader’s offense(s) is given to any other community to which the leader may move and to the umbrella denomination or movement. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 99 5. Procedures should be established at the denominational or movement level for disclosure of information: • Maintain an open personnel record in order to respond to future requests for references. • Provide information about the accused spiritual leader to any new communities to which they may be assigned or may move. In the case of organizations that do not have an overarching structure, every effort should be made to communicate this information to the new community. 6. Communities and their governing bodies should develop hiring procedures that require the disclosure of previous complaints, including actions taken and the determination of findings, as well as a full criminal background check (in some states, this is required by law) prior to hiring. A release of information from the candidate for any position must be acquired before performing the criminal background check. If the candidate refuses to provide this release, you then have important information about them. A CAUTIONARY NOTE The information that needs to be provided is fairly simple: The nature of the complaint filed against the spiritual leader, the resolution of the complaint, and the action by the governing body should remain in the spiritual leader’s personnel file and available for future reference. The particulars about the misconduct and the identities of the complainants should not be available unless there is good reason in the request for reference information. SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 101 Best Practice Flowchart for Adjudicating Complaints Complaint of Misconduct is Presented* Complainant Contacts Ethics Board/ Victim is a Child: Contact Law Leadership Committee/Judicatory Enforcement Immediately Accused is given Misconduct Policy & Procedures Initiated Complainant is given policy policy and procedures and procedures Complainant Interviewed to Given notice of Creation/review of formal formal complaint Receive Statement written statement Assign a contact person Interviewed the Accused Offer Advocate (Subject of Complaint) Notify community members Notify Insurance Carrier and Legal Representation Interview additional people about the investigation. See in the community Section 3 - ‘Communication Investigation by Committee/Board** Strategies for Spiritual Gather relevant materials Communities.’ (documents, emails, texts, messages, etc) Subject of complaint may be placed on disciplinary leave Written Report Prepared Committee/Board Reviews Written Report/Testimony; Deliberates to Make Judgment Subject of complaint Complainant notified notified Complaint found to be Complaint found to be substantiated unsubstantiated Subject of complaint Complainant notified notified Committee/Board decide disciplinary action Report of exoneration issued to the community Report to Suspend Termination community Review after Report of termination suspension issued to the community * Timeline of process based on Restoration to Termination Organization’s policy/procedures community ** Best practice recommends an independent third party conduct Report to community investigation on behalf of the Board SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 103 Roles in Response It is critical that community/organizational staff and volunteers are clear about the roles they are playing in response to a complaint. Sometimes your polity will dictate this; for others, there is flexibility. Often the confusion of roles or conflicts of interest in roles are roadblocks to successfully processing a complaint. Here are some things to consider as you determine roles both in your policy and also in your implementation of procedures in response to a complaint. 1. Judicatory Executive, Bishop, Dean of Seminary, Board President, Organization Executive You have to decide what your job is within your polity or institutional structure. For example, if, as Bishop, you are a pastor to pastors, then you will not be able to oversee the process of responding to the complaint. We also suggest that you don’t take on an advocacy role for the accused, but try to remain neutral even as you attend to the players involved. If you have a significant prior relationship with the complainant or the accused, you may need to step out of the process and designate others to implement the process in order to avoid a conflict of interest. Also, we caution against seeing your role as “protecting” your institution against the complainant in an adversarial way. However, if you decide that your responsibility is the overall health and wellbeing of the judicatory, seminary, or organization and the effective implementation of the policy and procedures you have adopted, then be clear about that in relation to both the complainant and accused. You are the neutral party committed to the integrity of the process. Designate, but oversee staff and volunteers carrying out their responsibilities. Once the complaint is adjudicated, you are still responsible for implementing the outcome. If the complaint is valid and discipline is required, it is your job to follow it through. If the complaint is invalid and exoneration is required, it is your job to follow that through. 2. Response Team A number of communities or organizations have created something often called a “Response Team” as part of their process in responding to a complaint. This is another place where there can be confusion. It is not the Response Team’s responsibility: • To “handle” this complaint, i.e. to “make it go away” • To “protect” the institution’s assets or reputation A Response Team can be a valuable resource if they are 1) well trained and 2) clear about their role. Their role should generally be as a well-informed resource available to: SECTION