164 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Conclusion After reading this chapter, you may worry that talking with survivors is fraught and destined to fail, like walking on eggshells. Fortunately, in my experience, that is rarely the case. Survivors want and deserve our attention and compassion. If they sense that you are responding with honesty and transparency, they won’t fault you for an errant phrase or the occasional misstep. When in doubt, listen more than you speak. It is their voices, not ours, that must dictate the next steps in their journey towards rebuilding trust and faith. Suggested Citation: Clites, Brian J. “Centering Victim-Survivors’ Voices,” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 159-164. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 165 To Listen Well is to Give Breath AZZA KARAM Azza Karam, Ph.D., is a leader in interfaith spaces. She serves as senior advisor on culture at the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), where she coordinates UNFPA-wide outreach with faith-based partners. She is Professor of Religion and Development at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam in the Netherlands. Perhaps it is because I have always been doubted, questioned, and forced to state my case time and again. Perhaps it is because I have struggled to convince the nearest and dearest—as well as the further and far less dear—of almost everything I believe. Whatever the reason, I did not even think to doubt the woman speaking to me. What she described I had seen and heard of happening. I had been subject to countless attempts to belittle and demean through and with my body and my emotions. “You are too sensitive” and “you are too passionate” remain frequent comments I receive—some by people doubtless attempting to show appreciation. Both are condescending comments which are judgmental to the core, and are comments men are highly unlikely to receive. They are not sexual per se, but they are gendered. And gender and sex are intertwined and intersectional in nature and approach. Gendered notions and attitudes about life are fundamentally built on sex or sexual norms and perceptions. So for someone to approach in gendered language is a sexualized approach. To Listen As the woman told me the story of how she had to fend off unwelcome sexual advances by someone she thought of as a friend and a colleague, I found myself torn. Torn between listening to her narrative and listening to my own narrative of knowledge. You see, I knew whom she was speaking about; I knew the cultural, organizational, and even individual contexts she was referring to. And because I knew about whom she was speaking and the spaces she was describing, I found myself having to shut myself up and force myself to listen to her narrative, not my own. As I listened, outwardly silent, the storm inside was growing. Because I knew that the individuals and the contexts lent themselves easily to the story of deceit, manipulation, and sexist and racial wrongdoing she was narrating. After all, I have inhabited these spaces for over three decades, spanning many parts of the world. I feel blessed to know so many who hail from far and near and everywhere. Well, kind of blessed. And because I knew, far from disbelieving her, a knot of fear and dread from my stomach to my throat made it difficult for me to speak. Those who know me know I am not slow to speak or to articulate my thoughts. Far from it. But this was a moment in which I truly struggled to listen and to speak. APPENDIX 166 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Why was I struggling to listen? Because my own thoughts, my own knowledge, could easily crowd out, and perhaps even redraw, the images she was sharing—her truth. Because my own anger, built on a mountain of pain at the ruthlessness of the combined sexual and racial and social disdain she was describing, could so easily intervene to color what I was hearing her say about her truth. Because part of me wanted to scream this could not, surely not, be true. And yet I knew that I had to be so very, deeply, and deliberately careful, to try to balance what I wanted to scream versus what I knew I had to do: to be there as she struggled to find words to describe how and what she wanted to say and to do. And herein I encountered one of the deepest challenges of listening to a total stranger share a story of sexual harassment involving people I know. This was not the first time I had been approached with such a story. In most cases, I knew the perpetrators being spoken of—not just knew of them, but actually thought myself to know them personally as well as professionally. In many of these cases, the accused were people for whom I had respect and even affection. In each case, I remember the distant sense of panic, the one where it seems as if the heartbeat grows so loud, and yet my thoughts go so slowly, that my entire body seems to freeze in slow motion. Because in hearing the story, I question myself too. I realize I am friends with a sexual harasser, or someone who lends themselves, quite clearly, to such an accusation. And this does not sit well inside me. So my struggle is to listen without wishing to bang my head against a wall very hard, since I am not the self-forgiving type. Listening to a story of sexual harassment can be a test of my own endurance and of my own self esteem. I often wonder what I would feel if I did not know the men in question. Would it be easier? I am tempted to think it might be. But in any case, full listening, with minimal interruptions, until the woman has voiced her whole story in the way she feels it important to say, is imperative. I also know that the best listening approach is to ask questions rather than rush to speak out one’s own opinions or judgments. From question to question, each question figuratively holding the woman’s hand and trying to navigate together deeper into whatever parts of the story the person speaking wishes to share. Not because I know what the shore should look like or what it is. Frankly, I do not. And I say this openly. “I am not sure I can help in doing anything about this,” is a refrain I will honestly say. “But I will listen.” The process of sharing is itself part of the healing. My conviction—call it a bias if you will—is that few women would go through a narration of such incidents just for the heck of it or because they wish to show off their enormous sexual appeal. No woman, I am convinced, finds it easy to describe being taken advantage of, especially not sexually, even if she were utterly fabricating the entire story. Few women love to share how they were touched in ways and in places that embarrass them deeply or hurt them or degrade them or make them feel unheard when they voice their discomfort. Few women enjoy feeling disrespected. So it is important to listen. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 167 This is also why I believe it is important to walk (or is it swim?) through her sense of pain—and often the shame—and confusion about her feelings, about the incident itself, to reach a shore where the woman can go from minute feelings of infirmity and disability to some sense of relief of sorts. Because I understand that how we speak of and share these particular stories can be part of how we ourselves write our own truths. And writing or voicing our truth is part of our faith in ourselves. Our words are our truth. Our words can be our path to healing. Thus, when we decide to share, we are already beginning a journey towards some form of healing. To Whom Do I/We Speak? Over the years, I have also learned that to whom I/we speak will make a huge difference to the journey of healing we are seeking to undertake. The worst insult which adds to the sense of injury is to speak to someone whom we deem trustworthy, or even just someone we identify out of need, only to find one’s truth questioned in so many ways—sometimes subtly and sometimes openly. The next awful thing is to have our memories questioned. “Are you sure?” has got to be a rotten classic. “Could it not have meant [insert anything innocent sounding here]?” is another sequel to that insult. Even to begin to respond with a “but…” can hurt. Changing the subject or walking away are equally unhelpful. Trying to remove oneself from responsibility by saying, “Oh, you need to speak to so and so [not really to me]” can be insulting. Even if one is not able to actively do anything about the sense of injury, one can—and should—listen and carefully, lovingly, let the woman know she is being heard. Her voice is being registered. This is why the battle inside me rages on as I listen, each and every time. I have got to be one of the queens of “but”—a heritage of my Libra mother who insisted on questioning every single thing (including debating her own convictions). So to prevent myself from sounding the miserable “but” as it rings deafeningly in my ears is a feat of self-control. My own husband believes I should have been a trial lawyer, one that tears apart every story of any witness—credible or not. The reasons why he thinks so are quite beyond the scope of this paper, but (pun intended) let me get back to the challenge of listening quietly with all my being, making no internal buts or howevers, or asking too many questions inside myself, and not—absolutely not—passing any judgment either way. Beyond Generations Hercules would have failed miserably, while Athena, the goddess of love—and war—may just succeed. The point being that as listeners to the narrative of sexual harassment, we need to be trained, above all, in some form of self-control. Quite apart from the logistical implications of how and whether this is to be taken up, and with whom, and to what end, and all those complicated and necessary questions and processes, the process of listening itself is very much like allowing the baby, just out of the womb, to take its very first breath. We cannot fail to listen properly. If we do, the damage is beyond imagination, and it is generational, because a woman’s sense of humiliation and anger can and does go beyond the one generation. APPENDIX 168 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Look—and feel—around you, wherever you are: it is not just through our own children that we transmit emotions and thoughts, just as it is not just through legislation that we transmit a sense of justice. Indeed, women are such powerful bearers of longstanding social norms that successive generations, institutions, and even empires seek to silence them, burn them in so many ways (including literally), or mold them to a particular version of truth that should be carried forward. Our sense of injustice, even when not articulated or acted for or against, transmits through the pores of the fabric of all existence. Women’s feelings are powerful agents of transformation, beyond schools and universities, beyond books and tablets, beyond the here and now. Why else would so much effort go into killing the spirits and ruining the bodies of women, even in the very same cultures where they are supposed to be venerated? Hell Hath No Fury as a Woman Scorned For a woman to be sexually harassed is to demean a woman’s spirit, to scorn her most ruthlessly. This is why the saying “hell hath no fury as a woman scorned” should not be underestimated. So when a woman has a story of sexual harassment or misconduct to tell, the veracity thereof is critical for sure, but true or false, there are underlying causes anyway. We can choose, as and when we are chosen as listeners, to listen and to listen well. Or we can choose to add insult to the sense of injury, and fail to listen, or worse, to take action that demeans further. Please understand me here: I am not saying all that is said in stories of being sexually harassed is true. I am saying that those who speak the stories have to be listened to—and that how we listen will define how we are as a society for generations to come. Suggested Citation: Karam, Azza.“To Listen Well is to Give Breath.” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 165-168. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 169 Sexual Misconduct in Spiritual Communities: A Lawyer’s Perspective CAROL MERCHASIN Carol Merchasin is a lawyer (retired) and former partner in the Philadelphia office of Morgan, Lewis and Bockius where she was the director of Morgan Lewis Resources, providing training on harassment and discrimination as well as investigation services for clients. Ms. Merchasin is an experienced investigator who has conducted dozens of workplace investigations. She was a pro bono investigator for Buddhist Project Sunshine where her investigation revealed sexual misconduct within Shambhala International. She is currently assisting several sanghas in bringing allegations of misconduct to light. When Anita Hill testified before Congress in 1991 in the confirmation hearings of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, accusing him of sexual misconduct in the workplace, she opened a nation- wide conversation about sexual harassment. This conversation was given new life in 2018 with the allegations against Harvey Weinstein, exploding a movement aptly known as #MeToo.1 It was inevitable that this movement of accountability for sexual assault by men in power would spread to include religious and spiritual organizations.2 Beginning in 2018, a variety of media outlets covered allegations of sexual assault against such high-profile spiritual leaders as Sakyong Mipham Rinpoche of Shambhala International,3 Lama Surya Das of the Dzogchen Foundation,4 Ravi Zacharias of Ravi Zacharias International Ministries,5 and Swamis Vishnudevananda, Mahadevananda, and Prahlada, teachers with Sivananda International Yoga Vedanta Institute.6 Many Muslim, Jewish, and Christian communities have also not been without allegations of sexual misconduct.7 Clearly, religious and spiritual organizations need to understand the potential criminal and civil liability for their leaders’ behavior, just as any workplace does. That includes understanding the organization’s own liability when it knew or should have known about the conduct as well as the correct way to respond to allegations. Far too many communities decide, without investigating, that the allegations cannot be true. Then, to avoid confronting the issue, they silence or shun the 1 Originally started in 2006 by activist and author Tarana Burke, the movement went viral and gained global awareness in 2018. 2 Of course, it is not only men in power that commit sexual abuse; they are, however, the vast majority of cases. 3 Andy Newman, “The ‘King’ of Shambhala Buddhism Is Undone by Abuse Report,” The New York Times, July 11, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/11/nyregion/shambhala-sexual-misconduct.html. 4 Justin Whitaker, “Popular American Buddhist Teacher Lama Surya Das Admits to Sexual Relationships with Students,” Buddhistdoor Global, August 6, 2020, https://www.buddhistdoor.net/news/popular-american-buddhist-teacher-lama-surya-das-admits- to-sexual-relationships-with-students. 5 Ruth Graham, “Ravi Zacharias, Influential Evangelist, Is Accused of Sexual Abuse in Scathing Report,” The New York Times, February 11, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/11/us/ravi-zacharias-sexual-abuse.html. 6 Louise Adamou, “‘Coercion and rape’: Investigating my yoga school,” BBC News, July 2, 2021, https://www.bbc.com/news/ world-asia-india-57400014. 7 “Muslim Communities Divided Over Abuse Allegations Against Popular Preacher,” NPR, All Things Considered, November 22, 2020, https://www.npr.org/2020/11/22/937804223/muslim-communities-divided-over-abuse-allegations-against-popular-preacher; Allison Kaplan Sommer, “Not Just Weinstein: The Year #MeToo Rocked and Shocked the Jewish World,” Haaretz, September 18, 2018, https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-not-just-weinstein-the-year-metoo-rocked-and-shocked-the-jewish-world-1.6480994. APPENDIX 170 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE person who came forward. Driving people who report allegations of sexual misconduct out of the community may appear to “solve” the problem by removing the person who complained, but it creates legal risks for the organization. This article sets out the basic legal must-knows with the definitions of common types of sexual misconduct, including sexual assault, rape, sexual harassment, and issues related to consent and power imbalances. It will review the pitfalls boards and leaders often fall into that can lead to claims of negligence. Finally, it will provide three steps that organizations can take to avoid sexual misconduct and harassment problems. Please note that this article focuses on the legal responsibilities of an organization. As a specifically spiritual organization, you will have other ethical, social, and theological considerations to address in your policy-making that are beyond the scope of this article. The Meaning of Sexual Assault Sexual assault is a serious offense with both criminal and civil law ramifications. It is often defined as sexual contact that occurs without the explicit consent of the victim. Sexual assault includes rape, attempted rape, fondling, groping, unwanted sexual touching, forcing a victim to perform sexual acts such as oral sex, or penetration of the victim’s body. Barbara, a member of your community, tells you that the leader of your organization, Jeffrey, has been asking her to go out with him, but she has turned him down every time. When he passed her in the hallway the other day, Barbara says Jeffrey grabbed her and touched her breasts as he kissed her. What should the board do? There are so many mistakes that a religious or spiritual organization can make at this point. A common one is deciding that Barbara is lying. “Everyone” knows Jeffrey wouldn’t do anything like this. He is married and the very essence of moral rectitude. Who would want to tarnish his good name? Or maybe the mistake is thinking that this is not sexual assault. Perhaps Barbara consented. Probably it was only a kiss, and the touching was accidental. And what’s wrong with a kiss? It’s hardly sexual assault. When adults engage in a sexual relationship willingly and with explicit consent, the term “sexual assault” does not apply. However, there are limitations to the issue of “willingness” depending on the law of the jurisdiction you are in. It’s important to recognize that in 13 states and the District of Columbia, consent cannot be a defense in sexual assault cases involving clergy. The reason for that is clear: there is a tremendous power imbalance between a religious leader and a student or congregant—so much so that consent cannot be given at all. The better question is, should the organization do anything about this before it becomes a legal matter? As you’ve probably guessed, the answer is yes. What happened to Barbara could meet the definition of a sexual assault (sexual contact that occurs without the explicit consent of the victim). And until an investigation is conducted, you do not know the facts. At this point, you only have assumptions and opinions—neither of which are going to help you in a lawsuit. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 171 Is there a right way to deal with this? Hopefully, before Barbara comes to you with her allegations, you have done three things: 1. Written a sexual harassment/misconduct policy;8 2. Enforced the policy with a process for reporting issues and by investigating all claims; and 3. Taken prompt, effective action designed to end any conduct that violates the policy or the law. Write a Policy Here are the things that should be in your organization’s policy: • To whom does the policy apply? Policies that exclude the leader are deficient. The policy must apply to everyone. • What is a violation of the policy? You should clearly set out examples of what conduct will violate the policy so that everyone knows what is expected. • How will you manage consensual relationships? Some organizations do not allow them (especially if you are in one of the 13 states or District of Columbia that do not permit consent as a defense); others require that consensual relationships be reported so that the risks can be mitigated. • What is the process for reporting a violation of the policy? This should be simple, clear, and not limited to one person or one committee. Complaints should be able to be raised through a variety of avenues. Don’t have a different process depending on the nature of the complaint. The process should always be the same: complaint, investigation, resolution. • Maintaining confidentiality. Complaints should be confidential and only divulged on a need-to-know basis. Gossip about a complaint is unacceptable and can lead to claims of defamation. However, it may be necessary to reveal the name of the person raising the issue for the accused to be able to defend themselves. Likewise, it may be necessary to reveal an investigation into the accused, so that others may be invited to come forward to provide information relevant to the investigation. • Encourage reporting. Don’t make it difficult. Widely disseminate the policy. You want to know about small issues before they become large (or legal) issues. • Do not allow retaliation. It is hard to overstate this: People who come to you with complaints are worthy of your respect because they are helping you to create a better environment for everyone. They may also be helping your community to avoid a claim of negligence. Barbara wants to report the sexual assault she experienced from Jeffrey. She tells Angela, a member of board, what happened. However, Angela says she can’t do anything because the policy says that all complaints must go to the ethics committee and Jeffrey’s best friend, Joseph, is on that committee. Barbara decides she had better not say anything more. 8 Some organizations call this an ethics policy; others have a separate harassment policy. If the bullet points above are covered, it does not matter what the policy is called. APPENDIX 172 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Is this a good outcome? Only if you like risk. The board is now “on notice” (that is, they know the harassment occurred). Now, even if Barbara doesn’t come forward, if Jeffrey assaults someone else, there is a legal risk of a claim of negligence. In addition, if Barbara is an employee, this conduct would potentially violate the sexual harassment laws of state and federal government. Enforce the Policy After you have a policy with a simple, clear, consistent process for reporting misconduct, you must enforce the policy. It doesn’t help to have a policy that you don’t pay any attention to. What does that look like? Every issue that comes up that would violate the policy or the law if it were true, must be investigated. For example, if Barbara says that George (another member of your community) was rude to her, do you need to investigate? No, you don’t need to investigate whether George was rude to Barbara, because that allegation, even if true, doesn’t violate the law. And it probably doesn’t violate your policy. It’s not something that George should be doing, so you may have to resolve it, but you don’t have to investigate. However, when Barbara says that Jeffrey assaulted her (even if she doesn’t use the word “assault”) then, yes, you must investigate because it violates your policy and the law. Here are other potholes to avoid: • Do not ignore anonymous complaints. It is, of course, difficult to fully investigate them, but you must do the best you can. • Do not make the mistake of thinking that an “informal” complaint is not a complaint. Any misconduct you know about needs to be dealt with, no matter how it comes to you. • Don’t require people to write their complaint and don’t create any other barriers to understanding potential misconduct in your community. • The board cannot conduct its own investigation of complaints against high-level leaders of its own community. Such an investigation will not be perceived as neutral and unbiased and is therefore not useful. An outside third-party, neutral investigator is needed in these circumstances. Every time an issue, complaint, or concern is raised, ask yourself: if this is true, would it violate our policy or the law? If it would, investigate. For example, your board receives an anonymous note saying that Barbara has been sexually assaulted by Jeffrey. Some members of your board feel that this is unreliable information (maybe even “hearsay”)9 and that nothing should be done. 9 “Hearsay” does not exist outside of the courtroom. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 173 If sexual assault is a violation of your policy and/or the law (of course it is!) then once you know, no matter how you know, you must investigate. Take Prompt, Effective Action The last step is to act based on the results of your investigation and the seriousness of the violation. Particularly as it applies to teachers and leaders, it is critical to take appropriate action that is commensurate with the findings of the investigation. For example, after an investigation finds that Jeffrey did assault Barbara, the board decides that they shouldn’t do anything, because Jeffrey is only human, has suffered enough, and deserves your compassion. It is true that we are all only human. And yes, Jeffrey deserves your compassion. But all of that is a separate issue from eliminating the behavior. Sometimes boards feel they can’t say anything about the outcome because it will be defamatory to the accused. While you should consult legal counsel if you have concerns about defamation, here is an example of a post-investigation statement that is not defamatory: After a credible allegation of sexual assault was raised against Jeffrey X, the board retained a third-party independent investigator to look into the claim. After a thorough, neutral investigation, the independent investigator concluded it is more likely than not that the assault occurred. Negligence: What Happens if We Don’t Follow These Steps? Negligence is generally defined as having a duty and breaching that duty, which is then the cause of harm. When it is part of a legal complaint, it looks like this: • The Organization (through the Board of Directors) owed Plaintiffs a duty of care to act in a reasonable and ordinary manner so as not to cause Plaintiffs any foreseeable harm. Among other things, Organization owed Plaintiffs a duty of care to provide a leader who would not sexually harass, abuse, and assault them during the course of their interactions. • The Organization further owed a duty to conduct a reasonable and independent investigation into the serious allegations of sexual misconduct by the Leader. • The conduct of Organization constitutes negligence. As a result of this reckless and conscious disregard of the rights of Plaintiffs, Plaintiffs are entitled to an award of punitive damages against Organization. The key words above may well be “punitive damages.” These damages are an added amount awarded in order to punish the defendant, to make an example of the defendant, and to deter the defendant and others from committing similar conduct in the future. APPENDIX 174 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE A Word About Sexual Harassment in the Workplace Every state has specific laws about sexual harassment that cover workplaces and their employees.10 An organization such as a spiritual community might not be covered by harassment laws depending on whether they have employees, how many employees they have, and the status of volunteers. Federal employment law does not cover volunteers (only employees), but the issue of whether someone is a true volunteer can be tricky. In addition, three states have employment laws that do cover volunteers (New York, Oregon, and California). So if you are an organization in one of those three states, it is possible that both your volunteers and your employees have the legal protection of the state’s harassment laws. Sexual harassment can include sexual assault as we described above, but it can also include conduct that is not physical. It includes offensive jokes, sharing sexually explicit images, and sexual advances, for example. It also includes “quid pro quo” harassment, where one person has more power than another and is using that power to obtain sexual favors. Conclusion The good news is this: if your community rigorously follows the three steps listed above—have a policy, enforce the policy by investigating, and take prompt, effective action—then you will be creating a community that is both safe and welcoming to all and one that is unlikely to run afoul of the law. Suggested Citation: Merchasin, Carol. “Misconduct in Spiritual Communities: A Lawyer’s Perspective.” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 169-174. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. 10 Also, remember that harassment is not only based on sex. It can also be based on race, disability, age, sexual orientation, and other protected characteristics. Your policies should also include a statement against discrimination, which can be handled in the same three-step process as any sexual misconduct or harassment claim. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 175 The Role of the Advocate LAURA SIDER JOST Laura is director at Mennonite Abuse Prevention, where she is building capacity for the prevention of sex-based misconduct in community contexts through client advocacy, case investigation, policy analysis, and public documentation. She also works as a consultant for ethics and safety with the Unitarian Universalist Association, specializing in misconduct investigation. Laura has worked in public health and human rights across industries, from reproductive health counseling to global health communications. She holds certifications in responding to clergy misconduct, investigative strategy, and Title IX. Most of us who are involved in responding to spiritual leader misconduct want to believe we can act in the best interest of the most vulnerable while also preserving our job, relationships, and church community as they are. In reality, this is not always possible as we face cross-pressures or outright conflicts of interest in navigating our various roles as friend, family member, or employee. If we fail to adequately understand and manage our roles as we respond to spiritual leader misconduct, we can compound harm for everyone involved. For the most vulnerable, it can result in a traumatic experience of institutional or cultural betrayal.1 Institutional betrayal can include deliberate acts or negligence perpetrated by institutions onto individuals that rely on these institutions for support, resources, protection, and in some cases survival.2 Cultural betrayal can occur when someone of your same marginalized group abuses you.3 A Primary Duty to the Vulnerable Employees and other members of a religious institution are enmeshed as a part of the community that is most directly affected by misconduct. Their response to misconduct is powerfully influenced by a duty to preserve the organization or community as it has been, a duty to the status quo that has supported their job or their relationships. In contrast, the role of the advocate is designed with a primary duty to the most vulnerable, working on behalf of their clients’ stated wishes with trauma-informed and victim-centered approaches. Community-based advocates can provide crisis intervention, give information on reporting options, accompany clients for medical or legal interviews, connect them to professional counseling and culturally specific resources, and support them during institutional response processes. Advocates often help their clients understand information offered by authorities 1 Jennifer J. Freyd, “When sexual assault victims speak out their institutions often betray them,” The Conversation, January 11, 2018. https://theconversation.com/when-sexual-assault-victims-speak-out-their-institutions-often-betray-them-87050 2 C.P. Smith, J. J. Freyd, “Institutional betrayal,” American Psychologist 69, no. 6, (2014): 575–587, https://doi.org/10.1037/ a0037564. 3 Jennifer M. Gomez, “The unique harm of sexual abuse in the black community,” The Conversation, May 13, 2019. https:// theconversation.com/the-unique-harm-of-sexual-abuse-in-the-black-community-114948. APPENDIX 176 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE and make sure their clients are being treated fairly. They can offer trauma-informed care and encourage victim-centered approaches that make it easier for their clients to access available support and accountability systems. System-based advocates are employed by legal entities or by organizations handling an internal complaint. They can serve many of the same functions as community-based advocates, but they will have limitations according to their duty to the institution. Research consistently shows that those who receive the type of support advocates are trained to provide have lower rates of post-traumatic stress and are less reluctant to seek further help.4 Power Imbalance and Role Misuse Individuals who have been harmed by a spiritual leader are generally in a position of less power than the person who harmed them, and the harm itself further erodes their personal agency. They’ve been put in a vulnerable position, and in order to report the harm to authorities, they must put themselves in another vulnerable position. They must face the power of the institution, which is even greater than or dependent on the person who harmed them. A well-trained advocate, because of their primary duty to their client, as well as their connection to communities of expertise in abuse prevention, can provide a measure of balance to the power of the institution. Advocates can also help members of the spiritual community to identify and fulfill their duties in the complaint process. This can be especially challenging because as members of the community we generally have multiple and overlapping roles that might come into conflict with each other. Institutional leaders tasked with handling a misconduct complaint are in a powerful—and difficult—position. Paternalistic Saviors, Powerless Bystanders, and Peace Police Dr. Hilary Jerome Scarcella of Colgate Rochester Crozer School of Divinity describes three roles institutions take on in the name of caring for victims that instead work in relation to derail genuine survivor-centered interventions: It is an excruciating task for a survivor to engage with any one of these roles, but when confronting just one of them there comes a point when it is possible to analyze, name, and critique the specific strategy a single role uses to covertly undermine survivors’ wellbeing. With critique comes the possibility of acknowledgment and change. But what tends to happen is that when an institution or an individual playing the role of paternalistic savior is critiqued as such, they take off that hat and quickly re-dress in the role of the peace police or the powerless bystander. 4 K.A. Lonsway, J. Archambault, “Effective Victim Interviewing: Helping Victims Retrieve and Disclose Memories of Sexual Assault,” End Violence Against Women International, 2021, https://evawintl.org/olti/. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 177 When a paternalistic savior is shown to have refused survivors’ legitimate needs, the savior can slip into the garb of the powerless bystander, claiming only to have been doing its best with limited resources, casting its critics as unjustifiably harsh. When it is revealed that the one playing the role of powerless bystander is not, in reality, a victim, the powerless bystander can move without too much difficulty into the role of the peace police and retroactively claim that its preference for inaction was, in fact, a principled act of holding open middle, neutral ground necessary to any process of reconciliation. And, when it is exposed that the peace police are not as neutral as they claim, they can move back into the position of the paternalistic savior and argue that it has been their right to direct the process all along.5 Even when institutional leaders have clearly defined roles and duties, inevitable internal pressures mean they are at risk of misusing their position and power. When leaders can acknowledge that this risk is normal and understandable, they can take responsibility for it and welcome measures of accountability. Indeed, every role in a misconduct case has limitations and associated risks. We all need support. We all need checks and balances. With this squarely in mind, institutional leaders can welcome advocates to help share the load of a job that is too heavy for any one person or close-knit community to bear alone. Advocates can help ease the burden on institutional leaders to meet the needs of everyone involved. During an Investigation Advocates can help both their client and the professionals involved in an investigation by monitoring and protecting their client’s emotional state and rights. They can mitigate the effect that stress and trauma have on individuals’ ability to remember and share details, and they can reduce the risk that an investigation itself will retraumatize those involved. These efforts help ensure the full participation of those involved, improving the overall effectiveness of the investigation. • Monitoring for signs of distress. With their presence alone, an advocate can provide the comfort and reassurance that facilitates their client’s ability to participate well in an interview. An advocate can also monitor whether their client might be experiencing stress and need to take a break. Advocates can help victim-survivors utilize relaxation techniques and they can offer encouragement: “You’re doing great” or “We’re almost done now, hang in there.” • Clarification. If it seems that the person being interviewed has misunderstood or misinterpreted something the investigator has said, the advocate may provide a neutral prompt to help clarify, such as asking the investigator to restate a question. Some questions may have the effect of making the interviewee feel that the investigator doesn’t believe them or blames them—for example, questions about consensual sexual contact— and an advocate can ask their client if they’d like to know the reason for the question being asked. 5 Hilary Jerome Scarsella, “When Survivors Come Forward: Analyzing Patterns of Progressive Institutional Response and Working toward Transformative Interventions.” In Sexual Violence in the Context of the Church: New Interdisciplinary Perspectives, eds. Mathias Wirth, Isabelle Noth, Silvia Schroer (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2021), 379–404. APPENDIX 178 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE • Intervention. In general, advocates should use only neutral prompts and use them sparingly, but advocates can also remind clients of their rights in cases where the professionals involved fail to do so. It can sometimes feel like the client is simply being swept along without any control or decision-making ability in the process. If the behavior of an investigator or another professional violates or threatens to violate the client’s rights, the advocate can discuss the issue privately with their client as well as with the professional and possibly their supervisor. • Follow-up. Advocates can also help prompt the professionals involved in an investigation to provide as much information as possible to their clients after an interview and throughout the investigation, including access to written reports.6 Checks and Balances Because part of an advocate’s role is providing accountability for institutional leaders who are administering a complaint process, and because many leaders are untrained, inexperienced, or in a compromised position for handling such processes, conflict can arise between the advocate and the institution. To institutional leaders, advocates can be threatening. They can be confrontational and adversarial, or otherwise refuse to conform to institutional norms of engagement. They can seemingly refuse to understand the internal pressures leaders face. A skilled advocate can ease such tensions, but it is important for institutional leaders to understand that the advocate has a duty to seek redress when they believe the rights or interests of their client have been violated, no matter how good the intentions or strict the internal limitations of the leaders. This duty generally includes advocating for implementation of best practices and broader systemic changes for abuse prevention. Broader systemic change requires institutional leaders to face and embrace the discomfort of significant challenges to the way their communities have operated. The harm we seek to address “ ” in a complaint process was in some The harm we seek to address in a complaint process was in some way way enabled by enabled by the community in which it occurred. Misconduct does not the community in happen in a vacuum, but rather through the use or abuse of existing which it occurred. structures. Misconduct does not happen in a vacuum, but rather through the use or abuse of existing structures. Advocates can be a great help to institutional leaders who honestly want to identify and address systemic problems but might not have the power to influence other internal actors without external pressure. Such dynamic internal-external interplay is an important part of sustainable change. 6 Adapted from EVAWI: K. A. Lonsway, J. Archambault, “Advocates and Law Enforcement: Oil and Water?” End Violence Against Women International, 2020, https://evawintl.org/wp-content/uploads/TB-Oil-Water-1-3-Combined.pdf. XIDNEPPA