RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 135 To Use or Not Use Mediation Some communities have adopted mediation as the Option A response to a complaint of spiritual leader misconduct. The thinking here is that mediation can help “resolve” this “conflict” between spiritual leader and congregant/student. When this doesn’t work, then they go on to Option B and adjudicate the complaint. This strategy on the part of a community represents an inadequate understanding of mediation. Mediation is a dispute resolution process whereby a neutral person (someone who is impartial and unbiased about the situation and the parties involved and has no direct interest in the outcome) helps the parties in conflict to discuss their issues and the possibilities of working through their conflict. One may hear mediation commonly referred to as an alternative dispute resolution, or “ADR,” method. This process is used in various contexts to resolve situations that have turned into a conflict. The dispute may be a war of words, a disintegration of a relationship, a legal battle, a fistfight, or an armed conflict. In addition to the neutrality of the third-party intervener, the other major principles of mediation include the parties’ freedom to decide whether to participate (and to what extent), the parties’ ability to speak for themselves rather than only through representatives, and the parties’ ability to make free and informed decisions. If used appropriately, mediation processes may be used effectively to resolve some complaints made against spiritual leaders. Consider this scenario. A spiritual leader becomes emotionally involved and sexually intimate with a congregant/student. The congregant/student realizes they are entangled in an inappropriate relationship and brings it to the attention of the body that authorizes the spiritual leader’s credentials. The accused leader is loved by many and has been a successful leader. Therefore, the authorizing body wants to handle this matter with as little disruption to the community’s equilibrium as possible. Some believe the accusation may just be a “misunderstanding.” To minimize the damage of a scandal, the authorizing body invites the congregant/student to participate in a mediation session with the spiritual leader. The congregant/ student declines participation and wishes to press forward with a formal complaint. The authorizing body is dismayed by the refusal to mediate and fears the congregant/student may have unreasonable demands. What is askew in this picture? The answer lies in the underlying reasons for the proposed mediation. In the scenario above, the authorizing body is afraid an ethics complaint would create controversy for a popular minister and be disruptive to the congregation. Mediation is suggested as a way to keep the matter confidential and dispose of the complaint as quickly as possible. If an authorizing body suggests mediation before it has investigated the allegations, it is inappropriately using mediation to avoid action. The situation described above is not a “conflict” between two equal parties. One party who has greater power in the relationship has taken advantage of the other party. This is potentially a violation of the judicatory policy on clergy misconduct. SECTION 3 136 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Avoidance of addressing this violation has devastating consequences for the complainant and the community. It frustrates the complainant’s efforts to regain their sense of power by standing up to the accused and encouraging the community to confront the alleged offender and hold them accountable. Avoidance suppresses allegations that others may have and may put others in harm’s way. The authorizing body may unwittingly collude in maintaining a spiritual leader’s destructive behavior pattern and enable the spiritual leader to hide behind a cloak of legitimacy. When an authorizing body has assessed the results of a thorough investigation, mediation between the accused spiritual leader and the complainant may be appropriate if the facts reasonably indicate that professional boundaries were not violated and a misunderstanding occurred between the persons involved. This might be the case if, for example, there are differing cultural expectations about certain behaviors. Mediation in this situation would enable the complainant and the spiritual leader to discuss the issues that brought them to this point, gain a better understanding of one another’s perspective, and make decisions about their future interaction. To preserve the integrity of the process and any outcomes, neither party should be shamed or coerced into participating. Returning to our scenario above, the authorizing body causes an independent investigation to be conducted after the complainant declines mediation and the evidence substantiates the complaint of sexual abuse. Is it appropriate for the authorizing body to suggest mediation before taking disciplinary action? This is unlikely. The answer to this query depends on the motivation for suggesting mediation at this stage and what the authorizing body expects to accomplish. Mediation may be appropriate if the authorizing body wishes to have a facilitated discussion with the complainant without the accused spiritual leader’s participation concerning the impact of the situation, the alternatives for disciplinary action, and the alternatives for restitution. Using mediation to avoid taking disciplinary action or to mitigate discipline is an inappropriate use of the process. This avoidance undermines the ethical foundation of the community’s sexual abuse policy, procedures, and disciplinary actions. Pressing for a mediation session with the accused spiritual leader’s participation would also be undesirable unless requested by the complainant. Our scenario poses one final question. What about mediation between the complainant and the offending spiritual leader after adjudication and disciplinary action? Restorative Mediation is a type of mediation process used by some dispute resolution practitioners who mediate spiritual leader sexual abuse cases. The goal of this form of mediation is for the complainant and the offender (or, if the offender will not participate, then a responsible party) to engage in a process that will promote the complainant’s healing. The complainant and offender (or responsible party) undergo extensive preparation before the mediation conference. The complainant must be emotionally ready to face the offender and identify what they need to regain spiritual connection, safety, strength, and a sense of justice. The offender (or responsible party) must be prepared to face the complainant, listen to their account of the devastating impact of the abuse, accept responsibility for the actions and the harm caused, and make reasonable amends for the negative consequences suffered by the complainant. Since adjudication of the case has already occurred, the focus is on the complainant’s healing and restoration. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 137 Communication Strategies for Spiritual Communities We offer the following best practices in communicating about a complaint and subsequent response to misconduct in a spiritual community. We encourage any spiritual community to consult with a communications professional and counsel in implementing a communications strategy. It is important for the leadership/board of directors to be proactive, transparent, maintain appropriate confidentiality, and always be mindful of the goal to support actions that bring justice and restore the integrity of the ministerial/teaching relationship. 1. Once a complaint is filed with the organizational leadership, the board of directors or designated response team should notify the community membership (where the leader presides) of the complaint. This is to alert anyone else who might have knowledge or experience of misconduct to come forward. Keep it simple. “We are writing to communicate with you that allegations of misconduct by a spiritual leader in violation of our policy have been filed against [name] with the [Board of Directors/ leadership]. [We] are addressing this complaint and will report our findings to you as soon as possible. [Name] will be on paid leave until this matter is resolved. If you have information regarding this matter, please contact [name] at [phone or email address].” Best practice assumes your policy provides for or requires leave of absence during the processing of the complaint. Sometimes allegations may be brought to the attention of the leadership when a formal procedure for receiving complaints is not in place. Communication strategies should still be proactive and transparent as well as always protect the confidentiality of the person making the allegations unless the complainant chooses to share their name. DO NOT identify the complainant(s) or discuss details of the complaint; DO NOT give other details that are irrelevant. But if this complaint has involved an arrest by law enforcement, you should include that information. 2. The notification of the complaint against a spiritual leader needs to be distributed individually to the entire membership. The preferred means for this notification would be snail mail/hard copy. DO NOT use social media to make this notification. DO NOT engage in discussion of the complaint or the process on the community’s social media. Discuss with counsel whether you post an announcement to the community’s website. 3. Be prepared for inquiries from the media. Appoint one person to be the spokesperson representing the board of directors/community. This ideally is someone who has had experience in communicating with media and who is part of the community’s identified leadership. 4. For follow-up requests and inquiries about the process, use the same format as #1 above in any prepared statements, adding, “A [committee/leadership team] has been designated to conduct an SECTION 3 138 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE investigation/fact-finding assessment of the allegations. There is not any further information to be offered at this time.” You can respond to questions about the process, e.g. name the committee/ leadership [Response Team] handling the complaint, who chairs it, what is the timeline, when do you expect to have a report of findings, etc. Direct those who feel they have relevant information about the investigation to a contact person for the investigation. 5. Once adjudication is complete, a formal report of findings and actions should be made to the community, again in hard copy but hopefully accompanied by an open meeting with leadership who can take questions. For example: “[Board of Directors] has determined that [name] engaged in unprofessional conduct in violation of our policy and involving violations of sexual boundaries with [two] adults who were members of [pronoun] community. As a result, [pronoun] has been removed from leadership of [name of spiritual community]. The [Board of Directors] will determine in the coming weeks the status of [pronoun] credentials.” -or- “[Board of Directors] has determined that [name] engaged in unprofessional conduct in violation of our policy and involving violations of [financial] boundaries with [two] adults who were members of [pronoun] community. As a result, [pronoun] has been removed from leadership of [name of spiritual community]. [Board of Directors] will determine in the coming weeks the status of [pronoun] credentials. [One] adult has filed criminal charges in this matter. The criminal investigation is ongoing.” 6. After adjudication and conclusion of the process, if a complainant/victim-survivor would like to speak publicly about their experience, they are certainly free to do so (this includes with the media or with the community where the person is/was a member). It is their story to tell and they should not be constrained by a gag order or a non-disclosure agreement from the community. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 139 Response to the Accused Spiritual Leader 1. Do not be surprised by the accused’s initial minimization or denial. 2. Do not be thwarted by the accused’s threats to sue the judicatory for loss of livelihood or slander. 3. Do not get hooked by the accused’s complaints of feeling “victimized.”1 4. Do not negotiate or make deals with the accused spiritual leader. 5. When appropriate, do require treatment from only a specialized, trained resource selected by the judicatory, not the spiritual leader. 6. Do not allow the spiritual leader to resign and give up credentials before the adjudication and then seal the records. If they decide to resign, keep the records open and clearly indicate that they resigned while under investigation. This is important and should be communicated to anyone in the future who seeks a reference on this individual. 7. Do encourage or require restitution to the survivor(s). 8. Do not respond with “cheap grace” or quick forgiveness. 9. Do remember that unequivocal accountability is the best means to bring an abusing spiritual leader to repentance/behavioral and intention change. 10. Do consider restoration of credentials or position. For an abusing pastor to be considered for restoration to leadership, these minimum conditions should be met: • Unequivocal acknowledgment of responsibility for harm done to victim(s), with a letter of apology • Genuine remorse for harm done • Repentance—a fundamental change in behavior and understanding, which may be accomplished through appropriate therapy • Offering of restitution to survivor(s) The way in which an abusing spiritual leader responds to the accountability process is the clearest indicator of their potential for restoration to ministry/teaching. Resistance, minimization, and rationalization are indicators that the spiritual leader will not be able to return to an effective ministry. 1 The acronym DARVO describes the common reaction by perpetrators when being held accountable: Deny, Attack, and Reverse Victim and Offender. SECTION 3 140 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE In considering a request for restoration to ministry/teaching, a judicatory/organization leader or committee should consider this question: Can you assure the community that this person will not violate the boundaries of the ministerial/teaching relationship again? If you cannot (and this is very hard to ensure), the spiritual leader should not be placed in a position of trust again because the risk to the community is so great. The legal liability for everyone involved in allowing a known abuser to minister/teach again is enormous if they perpetrate again. 11. Do reach out to spiritual leader’s family members with care and concern. 12. Do try to arrange for the financial support of the perpetrating spiritual leader’s family during a possible employment transition for the perpetrating spiritual leader. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 141 Response to the Complainant 1. Offer an advocate during the investigation and adjudication phases. (See Appendix: “The Role of the Advocate” by Laura Sider Jost) 2. Offer outside counseling referrals. 3. Reimburse counseling expenses. 4. Offer opportunities to meet with other complainants. 5. Provide information in a timely fashion. For example, return their phone calls as soon as possible. 6. Communicate in person, by phone, by email, and by letter. 7. At the end of the process, after an abusing spiritual leader has been called to accountability, express appreciation to the complainant for coming forward and helping to restore the integrity of the ministerial/teaching relationship. WHEN IN DOUBT, ASK YOURSELF: How will this action/inaction affect the victim-survivor(s)? How will it help make justice? How will it bring healing to the community? How will it bring change in behavior by an abusing spiritual leader? How will it protect community members/staff from further harm? SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 143 Response to the Community 1. In conjunction with local leadership, communicate in writing the findings and the actions of the judicatory/organization with every member of the community. People need to have direct, formal information from the judicatory/organizational leaders. The letter should clearly indicate the nature of the misconduct, but without details, and should not identify the complainant(s) unless they request so. 2. Offer a trained consultant (e.g. from the Response Team) to provide education on the topic of spiritual leader misconduct/sexual abuse in the ministerial/teaching relationship. This will help attend to the community’s grief, anger, and other reactions. (See Appendix: “Community Healing after Spiritual Leader Misconduct” by Darryl W. Stephens) Education is key to the healing of a community whose fabric is often torn apart by the disclosure of abuse by their spiritual leader. In the absence of understanding what this means, it is common for members to pick sides based on their experiences, which are usually their positive experiences of the popular spiritual leader “who could not possibly have done these things.” They generally don’t know who the complainants are and so they can easily demonize and blame them for this uproar. Basic education can equip members to better understand and deal with their feelings. We recommend the following resource. • Not in My Church (DVD) (available at VAWnet.org) • Not in My Congregation (DVD) (available at VAWnet.org) • Is Nothing Sacred? (Book) by Marie M. Fortune (available at Amazon.com) Suspicion Dismissing Common allegations with- Distrust out inquiry Denial Community Minimizing investigative process and Defining Responses to outcome allegations as Misconduct, “he said/she said” Allegations, and Don’t want to Retraumatization talk about it Investigations of survivors in anymore community Exhaustion Despair Rushing the investigative Disengagement process Taking Blaming victims Primary concern is for impact Sides Gossip and on leader divisiveness This infographic shows the common five responses of a spiritual community upon learning about the allegations against their spiritual leader, the investigation, and the outcome of the investigation. SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 145 Picking up the Pieces: Life after Adjudication If you are a spiritual leader hired after a misconduct case has been adjudicated, you may follow someone who engaged in misconduct, boundary violations, and/or abuse involving sex, finances, etc. You may enter with: • Information unknown to you prior to being hired • Information disclosed to you by judicatory or organizational leaders Whether or not the details of the misconduct are disclosed to you or not, you likely will observe or experience: • Poor or confused boundaries • Mistrust • Secrecy • Loss of members • Other disclosures to you • Trauma responses like anger or malaise If the details of the misconduct are unknown to you, pay attention and ask questions. Help people name what happened. If the misconduct is disclosed to you, you have the opportunity to help the community move toward healing. Temptations for spiritual community at this time: • “keep a lid on” – no information • “let’s move on” – denial and avoidance • “forgive and forget” – unhelpful ethics • “blame the victim(s)” – scapegoating • “support of offending spiritual leader” – denial Temptations for you as leader at this time: • Ignore and avoid • Try to look beyond the issue or move on too quickly • Remove the “problem”— i.e. encourage survivors to find another spiritual community SECTION 3 146 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE What people need at this time: • Information: What happened? What action has been taken by the governing body? • Education: What is spiritual leader misconduct? • Pastoral/spiritual care and support • A trauma-informed response (i.e. the four R’s) (See Section 3: “A Trauma-Informed Approach to Spiritual Leader Misconduct”) • Framework rooted in tradition: Where is God in this trauma? What does this mean in our pursuit of ultimate truth? • Space for anger and grief: individual and corporate • Integration into their history Your job as spiritual leader after misconduct: • Recognize anger, hurt, shame and betrayal • Create safe space for disclosures or conversations • Educate and inform • Recognize stages of grief • Practice good boundaries • Be proactive and lead them through this period of loss • Don’t be afraid to preach and teach texts from your spiritual tradition 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 147 Overview: Best Practices in Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct When a complaint of misconduct is brought forward in your community, refer to this list of Do’s and Don’ts in responding to the complainant and addressing the accused and your spiritual community. Do Don’t Respond promptly to complaints. Meet with Refuse to meet with the complainant; wait the complainant and thank them for coming an undue amount of time to reach out to the forward. complainant. Assume that the complaint is made in good Discount or minimize the complaint. Blame faith until adjudicated. the complainant. Give notice of the complaint to the accused. Not tell the accused of the complaint in a timely manner. Assume that the accused is innocent until the Assume that the complaint is false until complaint is adjudicated. proven. Offer an advocate or support person to the Not provide support for the complainant nor complainant. Provide a contact person for the the accused. accused. Be clear with your lawyer that your priority is to Put your lawyer in charge of responding to protect your community and hold spiritual the complaint or allow your insurance leaders who cause harm accountable. You company to drive the process. expect the lawyer to help you do this in accordance with your policy. Be fair and neutral in the process. Retaliate against the complainant for taking action; make promises to either the complainant or the accused. Explain the process and give complainant and Not follow your policy. Use an informal accused a copy of your policy and procedures. process. Communicate with all parties involved about the Fail to communicate with the complainant process, findings, and decision. about the status of their complaint (updates). Acknowledge the complainant’s pain and the Fail to respond to the complainant or accused’s distress and assure them that you take accused with sensitivity or sincerity. this very seriously. Follow the guiding tenets and principles of your Disregard the mandates of your spiritual tradition. tradition that call you to seek and prioritize justice. SECTION 3 148 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE After Adjudication After adjudication, if a complaint After adjudication, if a complaint has been verified, you need to: has NOT been verified, you need to: Complainant Complainant Notify the complainant and offer to Notify the complainant and offer to meet. meet. Thank the complainant for bringing Review the process and offer the complaint and making it possible pastoral/spiritual support. for the community to take action. Offer restitution (material payment) if Accused appropriate. Ask what else the complaint needs for Notify the accused and offer to meet. their healing process. Do NOT identify the complainant Offer to exonerate in appropriate ways. unless they request it. Do NOT request or agree to a gag Spiritual Community order for the complainant. Notify members of the spiritual Accused community of the outcome of your process. Notify the accused and offer to meet. Do NOT agree to provide a reference or confidentiality to the accused in sharing information about the outcome of your process. Spiritual Community Notify members of the spiritual group of the outcome of your process. Offer to meet with members of the faith community to explain your process and actions. 3 NOITCES