194 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE I. Recognizing Psychosocial Dynamics Unfortunately there is a general tendency to separate the psychological impact of intimate abuse from the social. In his study of sexual misconduct by Catholic priests, psychiatrist Len Sperry asserts that sexual misconduct can be conceptualized as: “a psychiatric disorder, a crime, or an immoral act.”2 For Sperry, treating clergy sexual abuse as a psychiatric disorder maintains a personal focus while treating it as a crime and an immoral act indicate a communal focus. He rightly believes that personal and communal impacts should both be attended to. However, to usefully conceptualize and address clergy sexual misconduct I believe it is necessary to go beyond this step. An approach that assumes a basic distinction between the personal and communal impact is insufficient and misleading. Our conceptualization of moral wrong has to be altered fully to include the destructive consequences of abuse labeled as personal (the psychological and spiritual dimensions). And those “personal” consequences must be understood as completely intertwined with communal dynamics. Our most basic conceptualization of the problem of clergy sexual abuse also has to be shifted so that we move beyond a solely individualistic focus on the psychiatric disorder, crime, or immoral act of the clergy abuser to recognize institutional and societal collusion with the abuser, which indicates a broader, systemic problem of moral harm. Recognizing how the victim-survivor’s anguish involves a personal dimension that cannot be separated off from social (and institutional) concerns provides a starting point. Acceding to a false dichotomy dividing the personal from the social (and institutional) masks crucial dynamics of the abuse. When, for instance, we pay attention to issues of gender, we refuse to ignore that maleness is one of the most consistent characteristics of clergy perpetrators across groups of Catholic and Protestant perpetrators and common in the experiences of both male and female victim-survivors. Thus we might ask what kind of institutional power does maleness have in the church that may intensify or reinforce the intimidation, for example, of the person being abused? What social meanings of maleness connected to the particular clergy abuser contribute to the anguish of the person victimized by the abuse? The kind of power assigned to maleness in the church (vested in God and male clergy) affects: how the abuser gains spiritual and emotional access to the victim- survivor; how the victim-survivor feels able/entitled to respond to the abuser; and the impact of the abuse in terms of how it is interpreted by the person abused, the church, and the wider community context. Exploring the significance of gender within the impact of clergy sexual abuse is key, in part, because of the centrality of gender in the church’s system of authority and understanding of power. This is obvious in the Roman Catholic and Orthodox insistence on the theological necessity for an exclusively male clergy. It is apparent in the emphasis on acknowledging God as Father, which is primary in Christianity’s trinitarian understanding of God and maintained across all traditions of the church. For example, to curb the slight but growing use of inclusive language for God used in liturgical settings, my own nine million-member denomination, United Methodists, reinforced rules during the 1990s about language in official liturgies in the church. They wanted to ensure that the trinitarian language used in baptism and ordination services referred to God exclusively as “Father.” To ask about the meanings of maleness that may be part of the anguish of victim-survivors of clergy sexual abuse is to explore institutional (and social) culpability. It means inquiring about how the church’s deeply entrenched understanding of moral authority is implicated in the abuse. 2 Len Sperry, Sex, Priestly Ministry, and the Church (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press 2003), 106. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 195 In addition, issues of race/ethnicity must not be ignored. In particular, they are vital to any discussion of clergy sexual abuse by Catholic priests in the United States. As psychologist Nanette de Fuentes writes: The more than 61 million members of the Catholic Church in the United States create a rich mosaic of diverse racial, ethnic, and socio-economic backgrounds.... For example, the Los Angeles Archdiocese, one of the largest in the nation reports serving Mass in some thirty- seven languages.... It is not uncommon for a parish that is primarily Latino or African- American to have priests in residence that are Irish, Filipino, or Vietnamese. However the issue and importance of diversity, ethnicity, and race in the literature on victim-survivors of clergy sexual misconduct has almost entirely been overlooked....”3 A much more thorough investigation of the implications of this racial/ethnic diversity is needed than I will attempt here. But when consideration of the role of issues of race and ethnicity is neglected, our understanding and ability to address the problem of clergy sexual abuse is diminished. Furthermore, in US society racial dynamics saturate issues of power, especially institutional power. More investigation is needed of how, for example, the white maleness of a perpetrator is part of the intimidation he wields against the victim-survivor. Or, how might the response of his church members to complaints made against him be informed by the Latino maleness of a perpetrator and the intimidating, inescapable presence of societal assumption about white superiority? The complex ways in which maleness is raced helps to provide important information about the impact of abuse on those directly affected by it as well as how its significance may be interpreted. In news reports about sexual abuse of children by Catholic clergy there have already been some discussions of gender related to issues such as: why more men than women have come forward with complaints of abuse that occurred when they were children and youth; whether boys are more available targets of abuse for priests than girls; or if boys are more often chosen by serial perpetrators than girls because more clergy perpetrators may be male homosexuals.4 This coverage consists mainly of a search for gender patterns and trends. Focusing on the role of gender in intensifying the victim-survivor’s anguish instead forces us to investigate more precisely what is morally wrong about clergy abuse. It leads us to confront the question of how gender should function institutionally (and socially) so that it is not a supporting ingredient in the perpetuation of abuse. When revealed by the authors of clergy sexual abuse accounts, how can racial/ethnic dynamics that are also present help to fuel the abuse? In US mass media news, racial/ethnic identity is usually not mentioned if those involved are white.5 However, even the absence of a racial identification for white victim-survivors, perpetrators, or church communities in accounts of clergy sexual abuse has significance. It reflects the privilege of whiteness in US society, the privilege of not having to think about racial implications. But for primary (abused person) and secondary (pastoral charge/ 3 Nanette de Fuentes, “Hear Our Cries: Victim Survivors of Clergy Sexual Misconduct,” In Bless Me Father For I Have Sinned: Perspectives on Sexual Abuse Committed by Roman Catholic Priests, ed. Thomas G. Plante (Westport: Praeger 1999), 146. 4 For example, see: Sacha Pfeiffer, “Women face stigma of clergy abuse, many are reluctant to come forward,” Boston Globe, December 27, 2002, A1; Marilyn Elias, “Is Homosexuality to Blame for the Child Sexual Abuse Crisis Now Plaguing the Catholic Church?; Assumptions persist but study says gays are no more likely than heterosexuals to molest kids,” USA Today final edition, July 16, 2002, D06. 5 Most news reporters believe that they should racially identify the subjects of their stories only when relevant. But most reporters view whiteness as a ‘normal’ identity that is intrinsically less relevant (less newsworthy) than identifying racial ‘others’ who appear in stories. Therefore the privileging of whiteness as norm tends to be maintained. APPENDIX 196 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE church community of abuser) victim-survivors who are white, could expectations of privilege and entitlement that are so normalized that they are rarely if ever acknowledged or questioned, perhaps intensify feelings of devastation, confusion, shame, or demoralization at being victimized by trusted white clergy members? As mentioned above, a clergy perpetrator’s white maleness could be essential in fostering trust in his authority and thus function as part of his arsenal of socio-religious power that intimidates and provokes feelings of powerlessness for those he victimizes. These interconnected emotional, spiritual, and social dynamics of clergy sexual abuse deserve much more in-depth study. II. Exploring the Experience of Psychosocial Anguish Specific examples will help to clarify how destructive psychosocial effects can be manifested in the experience of clergy sexual abuse and why their combined impact must be addressed as morally harmful. Intimidation may be part of the physical brutality of the abuse. For example, as a thirteen-year-old altar boy, Hank Bachmann was repeatedly summoned by his priest James Gummersbach to the basement of a St. Louis, Missouri, church where Gummersbach blindfolded him, “tied his hands to a pipe, stripped him” and then raped him.6 How did the maleness of his abuser contribute? That is, how did the physical strength of this man tying him up, the pain and brutality inflicted in the rapes, the fact that the abuser was a male authority figure in the community, and representative of God the Father, contribute to the intimidation of this boy by his abuser who kept calling him back for repeated assaults? Suing the church about the abuse that occurred when he was a child involved a grueling court battle for Bachmann, with multiple phases. Finding the final result disappointing, Bachmann commented: “I feel all of this anger that he was allowed to get away with it, that the church was allowed to get away with it... I can’t forgive and I can’t forget. The thing is, I still feel like I’m responsible for what happened.”7 The combined psychosocial consequences are clearly evident in this statement. The emotional reaction is inseparable from the institutional betrayal. Furthermore, I wonder how gender issues might help to reinforce this victim-survivor’s struggle with self-blame. They might be a factor in that part of the cultural meaning of manhood often communicated to males includes messages about not “letting” someone brutalize you and that you are responsible for it if you do “let” someone do that to you. Social messages such as this about maleness, and the lack of institutional accountability (of church and courts), reinscribe the abuser’s disdainful torment of the boy. Intimidation in the experience of clergy sexual abuse can be more disguised than in Bachmann’s experience. It can take the form of the coercive element in the perpetrator’s manipulation of friendship and trust. A male victim-survivor of Rev. Ronald Paquin, from the Boston Archdiocese, had a long-term series of encounters with Paquin over several years. The abuse started when he was an altar boy at age eleven or twelve. This victim-survivor of abuse said that he viewed Paquin as a father figure because of how gently the emotional relationship was cultivated (alongside the sexual contact). In what was the boy’s first sexual experience, he describes how the priest was “physically bringing me to ejaculation. He was very gentle about it... He’d say, ‘are you okay? This 6 Sandra G. Boodman, “How Deep the Scars of Abuse? Some Victims Crippled; Others Stay Resilient,” Washington Post, July 29, 2002, A01ff. 7 Ibid. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 197 is completely normal.’ He said it was just a good feeling. And that’s how he pitched it: it’s good to have an ejaculation, it’s good to be comfortable with him.”8 Gender issues (linked to sexuality) are evident here in the way that this encounter with an older male authority figure teaches the boy about male sexual functioning (orgasms) and in how this abuser “guides” him through a kind of “rite of passage” into male sexual maturity, his first sexual experience of ejaculation through stimulation by another person. Maleness is at issue in how this victim-survivor also pointed out his sense of being fathered by the priest whom he felt had taught him about right and wrong through repeated, long conversations, and treated him like a son. Intimidation in this instance takes place through continual coercive pressure applied with seeming kindness and gentleness. Moral manipulation is a tool of the abuser that further compounds the moral harm inflicted. This priest, friend, mentor, father figure pressures him to understand this abuse as a good, normal encounter. Parallel gender issues surface in the situation of a woman who was sexually abused over a period of fifteen years by a priest she identifies as her “spiritual father.” The pastoral relationship started when she was a senior in high school. Feeling hurt and isolated by the sexual abuse by her biological father, the death of her mother, and the lack of support from her own church community, she sought a church to which she “had no family or cultural ties.”9 She explains that she was the only black child in her hometown to get polio and describes the inappropriate touching of her leg by the priest early in their pastoral relationship as she “told him about being bewildered by my father’s touch during my hospitalization with polio.”10 (Her father’s sexual abuse intensified after she came home, especially after her mother’s death when she was fourteen.) As she describes the painful memory of her father molesting her while she was in the hospital, the clergy perpetrator exploits her vulnerability, using it as an opportunity for his own abusive behavior. She went to this priest, Patrick, for counseling as a college student, uncertain and anxious about experiencing feelings of attraction to a classmate in her “delayed puberty.” She describes how, “sitting close to me, he told me I needed to express the sexual feelings in a safe place, with him. He began to kiss me, laughing at my inexperience when I didn’t know what to do with his tongue in my mouth. He quieted my opposition with the assertion that he knew what was best for me. During later appointments he showed me things to avoid with boys if I wanted to be a good Christian girl.”11 The perpetrator intimidates her, coercing her in a belittling manner. Gender issues related to sexuality and her particular biography help to accomplish this intimidation. The boundary confusion and emotional neediness she brought because of the abuse by her father influenced her to seek out a “spiritual father” who would be trustworthy on matters of sexuality. Also, gendered social and religious messages that teach women to be submissive, especially to male authority, may also aid the abuser’s ability to intimidate her. Later as she works on her recovery, issues of race arise in her therapeutic acknowledgment of her anger about the abuse. She says: “I seethe as I struggle to understand what trait of mine signaled that I would not challenge his authority. Did my race give him the assurance that my revelation 8 The Investigative Staff of the Boston Globe, Betrayal: The Crisis in the Catholic Church (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2002), 63. 9 “Et Al” (Pseudonym), “Repairing the Damage of a Shepard,” in Nancy Werking Poling, Victim to Survivor: Women Recovering from Clergy Sexual Abuse (Cleveland Ohio: United Church Press 1999), 23. 10 Ibid., 25. 11 Ibid., 26. APPENDIX 198 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE of abuse would be ignored or disbelieved?”12 The necessity to analyze racial dynamics in her experience of sexual abuse is a socially imposed burden of a racist society that adds to her anguish. It led to an inquiry about if and how something about her own identity gave permission for the abusive treatment she received. Her moral worth—her right to be treated with respect and to receive trustworthy pastoral care—is diminished by her (lack of) racial/gender status. Issues of race can also be a source of trust the perpetrator can manipulate. A man accused Rev. Maurice Blackwell of sexually abusing him in Baltimore, Maryland, starting at the age of fourteen or fifteen and lasting until he was about twenty-six years old. The man recalled his initial admiration for the priest: “I was always in awe of him, a real black priest just being himself.”13 He met Blackwell during the late 1960s, a period of widely publicized support for black nationalism and black power, especially in eastern, urban black communities like Baltimore. With his Afro, dashiki and self- assured attitude, Blackwell was apparently a charismatic role-model, exhibiting black maleness the boy admired. This perpetrator would rescue him from beatings by physically abusive parents and take him to spend the night at his seminary and subsequently in the rectories he was assigned to serve where he sexually abused him with kissing, fondling and oral sex.14 Psychosocial longings for respect and dignity fed by a racist society as well as abusive parents add to the vulnerability and trauma in this man’s experience of clergy sexual abuse. III. Psychosocial Factors in Institutional Responses Destructive psychosocial dynamics that are part of incident(s) of clergy sexual abuse and the anguish the abused person suffers are reproduced in community responses. As in other forms of sexual assault and abuse, in clergy sexual abuse the victimization of females has triggered discussion about degrees of victimization. Are certain instances of clergy sexual abuse morally worse than others because certain victim-survivors of it are more innocent than others? Some church officials see clergy abuse of females as a lesser moral depravity. Chicago’s Cardinal Francis George commented that: “There’s a difference between a moral monster like Geoghan who preys upon little children and does so in a serial fashion and someone who, perhaps under the influence of alcohol, engages in an action with a 17- or 16-year-old young woman who returns his affection.”15 [Geoghan was a predator protected by the church while he abused many boys in the Boston Archdiocese.] Similarly, before his resignation Bishop Bernard Law commented during a deposition in a lawsuit against the Boston Archdiocese that “there was a ‘qualitative difference’ between clergy sexual abuse toward a minor and toward a female. Law’s lawyers cut off the questioning before Law could explain the difference....”16 Assertions such as these by church leaders depicting a moral hierarchy for evaluation of clergy sexual abuse, where only boys under twelve are labeled as truly innocent, institutionally reproduces 12 Ibid., 35. 13 Robert E. Pierre, “Haunted by Wounds of the Church; Man Describes Abuse by Maryland Priest, Anguish Afterward,” Washington Post, June 3, 2002, A01. Blackwell was shot and wounded by Dontee Stokes in 2002 who was then tried and acquitted for it mainly because of evidence about the abuse. Stokes had previously complained to the Archdiocese of Baltimore about being sexually abused in 1993 but his complaints were not believed and Blackwell was returned to the parish after a three-month suspension. Annie Gowen, “Priest shooting may not result in Jain time,” December 18, 2002, B02. 14 Pierre, “Haunted by Wounds of the Church,” n. 12. 15 Alan Cooperman, “‘One Strike’ Plan for Ousting Priests Has Catholics Divided,” Washington Post, May 19, 2002, A01ff. Also see: Kathy Shaw, Thomas Farragher, and Matt Carroll, “Church Board Dismissed Accusations by Females,” Boston Globe, February 7, 2003; Robin Washington, “Critics of Vatican say girls forgotten: Ban on gay priests called off the mark,” November 7, 2002. 16 Stephen Kurkjian and Sacha Pfeiffer, “Woman’s Alleged Abuse By Priest ‘Personal,’ Wrote Law: Alleged Assault ‘Personal,’” Boston Globe, August 15, 2002, A1. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 199 the traumatizing behavior of abusers. It uses gender as a way of morally devaluing the worth of certain victim-survivors, preying upon their vulnerability (their victimization by clergy), exploiting their lack of power, sadistically maintaining control and authority that serves the interests of the institutionally powerful. Even when females complain about sexual abuse that occurred when they were minors they have not necessarily been taken seriously. For example, when Anguella, now sixty, complained to Oakland California Diocese officials in the early 1990s that she had been raped by a priest as an eight-year-old she was subjected to extensive psychological testing. “Me!” she says, her voice still resonating with disbelief. “They thought I was the crazy one.... Maybe I am crazy, but if I am, there’s a good reason for it. It’s what they put me through.” Nothing, she says, was done to comfort her or to punish the priest.17 Anguella’s situation demonstrates how psychological issues, or more precisely, emotional woundedness is used against the abused person by institutional representatives responding to her complaint. At the same time, psychological diagnoses have been used to protect and reinstate clergy perpetrators, willingly putting those under their pastoral authority at risk. Father John Calicott who served a five hundred member church in Chicago, was removed in 1994 from his parish after he admitted to committing the “sexual misconduct” which two men complained had occurred when they were boys under his pastoral care. He was sent for psychiatric treatment and then reinstated in 1995 to his parish duties including teaching at “the largest African American Catholic grammar school” in the US. In explaining his decision to return Calicott to his pastoral assignment, Archbishop Bernadin reportedly indicated “doctors had concluded that his behavior was not ‘an expression of a fundamental psychological disorder.’” Moreover, Bernadin pointed out that his congregation favored his return.18 In a 2002 interview Calicott, an African American, explains: “I think sometimes that in the black community, because we’ve been an oppressed community, there is a greater understanding that we are all sinners, that people fail, situations are extremely complex.” His reference to black oppression functions as an insidious appeal to racial group loyalty to justify acceptance of his behavior (at the expense of those victimized by his abuse?). According to Calicott’s assertion, if I were a black person he had abused (or any black person) and I disagreed with him, I would be breaking with common understandings of “our community.” I would be refuting our community’s experience of oppression that just happens to justify protecting him from being held accountable with serious consequences for his violation of trust, abuse of power, and damage to children as a perpetrator of clergy sexual misconduct. (The black community could be forgiving towards him if he served a prison term.) Moreover, oppression may have distorted black people’s expectations so that they are accepting and forgiving of mistreatment in self-destructive ways that must be resisted. Calicott’s self-justifying assertion also gives emphasis to the theological notion of forgiveness of sins. He uses his clerical authority as teacher and pastor to align acceptance of his behavior without further consequences, with the expression of Christian faith. Issues of racism and the very idea of psychological disorder are manipulated by institutional leaders to produce a systemic denial 17 Jennifer Carnig, “Restoring Faith; Bay Area Clergy sexual abuse survivors work toward mutual healing,” Oakland Tribune, April 28, 2002, Bay Area Living Section, 4. 18 Alan Cooperman, “‘One Strike’ Plan for Ousting Priests Has Catholics Divided,” n. 14. APPENDIX 200 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE that any significant harm has been done to those abused. As psychiatrist Richard Sipes writes, “Psychiatry and psychology can be enlisted to defend and clerical system. The church will not flourish by enlisting professions to help it avoid basic issues that tolerate and perpetuate abuse.”19 There are emancipatory possibilities for victim-survivors of clergy sexual abuse when psychological factors that abet and nurture the abuse are revealed. Victim-survivors may be able to glimpse some of the ways that they are “set up” for anguish by such factors during and after the sexual abuse. Analysis of that process implicates all of us in the broader society in the sexual abuse. Our hegemonic understandings of gender and race/ethnicity, among other social categories that are institutionally supported and routinized, in practice help to perpetuate clergy sexual abuse, intensifying the trauma of victim-survivors. If that trauma is to be alleviated and further trauma prevented, solely blaming individual “sick” clergy perpetrators, homophobic scapegoating, appeals to Christian forgiveness and black racial unity, ignoring women/blaming women victim-survivors, any attachment of moral authority to maleness—all represent examples of systemic corruption that will have to be jettisoned in Christian institutional responses to clergy sexual abuse. A socially and institutionally sustained problem like clergy sexual abuse can be socially and institutionally defused. Suggested Citation: West, Traci C. “The Factor of Race/Ethnicity in Clergy Sexual Abuse of Children,” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 193-200. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. 19 A. Richard Sipes, “The Problem of Prevention in Clergy Sexual Abuse,” in Bless Me Father For I Have Sinned, ed. Thomas G. Plante, n. 2. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT When prevention fails and a spiritual leader violates the boundaries of a pastoral or teaching relationship, a judicatory or organization must be prepared to respond. A complaint of misconduct requires response and action. Spiritual and religious institutions have a moral responsibility to respond justly and fairly to the complainant, the spiritual leader, and the community in order to repair the brokenness and betrayal caused by misconduct. The complaint needs to be investigated and adjudicated; the community also needs support to deal with the confusion, grief, and anger in order to move towards healing and restoration. Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct lays out the basic principles of analysis of misconduct in a spiritual or religious community: who, what, when, and where. It offers the principles for trauma-informed responses to complaints and the conceptual framework to navigate the process of response. The handbook is non-denominational and multifaith and not intended to represent the teachings of any particular spiritual tradition in matters of doctrine or morals. An invaluable resource for judicatory leaders, committees, and commissions who are addressing complaints of spiritual leader misconduct. Includes extensive, comprehensive, and essential resource with reference materials, case studies, best practices, and articles by experts in the field of religious ethics.