14 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE espouses the middle way and the Four Noble Truths of suffering. According to the Buddha, they are: “Now this, monks, is the noble truth of stress: Birth is stressful, aging is stressful, death is stressful; sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are stressful; association with the unbeloved is stressful, separation from the loved is stressful, not getting what is wanted is stressful. In short, the five clinging-aggregates are stressful. “And this, monks, is the noble truth of the origination of stress: the craving that makes for further becoming—accompanied by passion and delight, relishing now here and now there—i.e., craving for sensual pleasure, craving for becoming, craving for non-becoming. “And this, monks, is the noble truth of the cessation of stress: the remainderless fading and cessation, renunciation, relinquishment, release, and letting go of that very craving. “And this, monks, is the noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of stress: precisely this Noble Eightfold Path—right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.” Upon sharing his realizations of the Four Noble Truths with his first disciplines, it is said that the Buddha set the “Wheel of Dhamma” in motion which cannot be stopped by any human or god. Death The final major life event for the Buddha sets the stage for its post-Buddha configuration. The Mahaparinirvana Sutra details the months leading up to the Buddha’s death. At 80 years of age and nearing the end of his natural life, many questions arose around a successor to the Buddha. To these queries, the Buddha replied that “he would appoint no successor, since he had never considered himself to be the leader of the sangha. Henceforth, he said, the monks should be self-reliant and hold fast to the Dharma as their island and refuge, and the Vinaya (the monastic rules) as their teacher. [...] This meant there would be no need for a head or patriarch and no central institution charged with determining orthodoxy.”3 The story of the Buddha’s life and enlightenment teaches several important ideas related to spiritual leadership and teacher misconduct. The first is the mindset of the Buddha. As a renunciant, he was committed to finding an end of suffering not out of fear of old age, sickness, and death but out of compassion. As an enlightened being, the Buddha was “awakened to” the impermanence and oneness of all beings and things as the true nature of life. With this awakened mindset, he saw through the concept of the self and the other and the suffering that arises from our attachments to these concepts. His spiritual path, therefore, was established on a commitment to finding an end to suffering not just for himself but for other beings and things as well. The Ariyapariyesana Sutta (“The Noble Search”) in which he describes his life as a renunciant, differentiates between the noble and ignoble path for those called to the Buddhist path: 3 Prebish and Keown, 39. 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 15 Monks, there are these two searches: ignoble search & noble search. [...] And what is the noble search? There is the case where a person, himself being subject to birth, seeing the drawbacks of birth, seeks the unborn, unexcelled rest from the yoke: Unbinding. Himself being subject to aging... illness... death... sorrow... defilement, seeing the drawbacks of aging... illness... death... sorrow... defilement, seeks the aging-less, illness-less, deathless, sorrow-less, undefiled, unexcelled rest from the yoke: Unbinding. This is the noble search. In this sutta, the Buddha is clearly speaking from the realization of oneness—that we all experience suffering even as spiritual seekers and leaders. From this awakened mindset, one goes forth on the noble path out of compassion and a commitment to relieve suffering and protect the vulnerable. This awakened mindset is crucial for not falling back into false attachments to ego which can lead to the misuse of power and create suffering rather than relieve it. The Four Noble Truths, a fundamental teaching for all Buddhist traditions, underlines suffering/ stress as arising from clinging to the “I” or “self” as well as the things that solidify this “me-myself- and-I” mindset, such as power, status, wealth, position, etc. The Noble Eightfold Path, the fourth noble truth, is a powerful aid to live in a manner that does not lead to more suffering—all of which starts with an awakened mindset of oneness and compassion. The final moments of the Buddha’s life also teach the significance of community over hierarchy. The Buddha made it clear that there was no one voice or institution of authority in Buddhism. Instead, Buddhists “take refuge” in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha—or the Three Jewels: Buddha as the awakened true nature of reality (including our own true nature); Dharma as the teachings; and Sangha as the community we serve as well as the vast community of all beings. The Three Jewels emphasize our interconnectedness and instill a sense of service and humility as refugees all seeking shelter. As leaders, ministers and teachers of a community, you surrender to something larger than “me-myself-and-I.” The story of the Buddha’s life is therefore a reminder for Buddhist leaders and teachers to practice from an awakened mindset of compassion and humility, and to always aim to reduce suffering. Broken Vows The following is an excerpt from a 2017 open letter penned by former students of Sogyal Rinpoche (born Sonam Gyaltsen Lakar), a prominent Tibetan Buddhist teacher accused of sexually and physically assaulting his students and misusing funds for many decades. The author of The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying (1992), Sogyal Rinpoche was the founder and spiritual director of Rigpa, an international network of 117 Buddhist centers across 24 countries. Sogyal Rinpoche died in 2019.4 Please understand the harm that you have inflicted on us has also tainted our appreciation for and practice of the Dharma. In our decades of study and practice of Tibetan Buddhism with you, we trained our minds to view you as the “all embodied jewel” and the “source of all the teachings and blessings” of the Buddha-Dharma. We trusted you completely. Yet, we struggled for years because your actions did not square with the teachings. Today, for many of us who have left you, the Lerab Ling community, and Rigpa the organization, our ground of confidence in the Buddha’s Dharma has been compromised. Some of us, who chose to 4 See the open letter in Lion’s Roar: https://www.lionsroar.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Letter-to-Sogyal- Lakar-14-06-2017-.pdf. SECTION 1 16 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE depart abruptly Lerab Ling, left all of our possessions, because we were desperate to break away from your abuse and the community that supported it. Whether we departed abruptly or have faded away from you and Rigpa, we struggle to rekindle an appreciation for the transformative teachings and teachers we encountered. Often when we sit down to meditate and practice, we feel polluted with trauma from our experience with you; some of us relate to the Vajrayana with deep suspicion; and some of us are at work rebuilding from scratch the foundations of our study and practice recognizing that your manipulation was intermingled with all that we were taught. Others of us seek conventional therapy as a means for processing. So quite contrary to your aspiration to bring the true Dharma to beings, the effect of your methods is that our relationship to the Dharma has been tainted. We now see clearly the many ways that you betrayed our trust, manipulated and abused us and our Dharma brothers and sisters. [...] Some of us, who have held positions of responsibility within Rigpa, struggle with our own part in having covered for you and “explained” away your behavior, while not caring for those with traumatic experiences. Our past motivation to see all the actions of our tantric teacher as pure obscured us from seeing the very real harm that you are inflicting. [...] We can no longer stay silent while you harm others in the name of Buddhism. [...] We no longer want to indulge in the stupidity of seeing the Guru as perfect at any cost. The path does not require us to sacrifice our wisdom to discern, our ethics and morality, or our integrity, on the altar of “Guru Yoga.” When we become Buddhists, we take on many vows that are core to our Buddhist practice. These practices are meant to cultivate an ethical way of being so that we may always live in the Dharma and help others do the same. These can include the Ten Grave Precepts: • To appreciate and affirm all life and not to kill. • To respect others’ possessions and not to steal. • To honor the body and not misuse sexuality. • To be truthful and not to lie. • To be sober, attentive, and not cloud the mind. • To refrain from talking about others’ errors and faults. • To refrain from elevating myself and blaming others. • To reframe from being stingy, especially with the Dharma. • To refrain from indulging in anger and hatred. • To refrain from speaking ill of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Furthermore, Buddhist leaders and teachers take the Bodhisattva vows: • Sentient beings are numberless, I vow to save them; • Delusions are inexhaustible, I vow to put an end to them; • Reality is boundless, I vow to perceive it; • The Buddha Way is unsurpassable, I vow to embody it. 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 17 Sexual abuse and teacher misconduct are a violation of these fundamental practices and ethics on two levels. On one level, they go against many of the precepts, such Avalokiteshvara, The Bodhisattva as an appreciation of all life, honoring the body and not misusing sexuality, and to of Compassion refrain from lying and dishonesty. Lama Willa Blythe Baker, a survivor of sexual Avalokiteshvara, the Bodhisattva of Compassion, misconduct in Kagyu Thubten Choling saw how much sentient beings were suffering. Monastery, shared that, “in most sanghas This filled them with great sorrow and compassion, where misconduct is occurring, there is a causing tears to flow from their eyes. They asked the circle of people in the know, but incredibly Buddha for guidance, and the Buddha encouraged they may not be aware of each other. In Avalokiteshvara to be motivated by loving- other words, there is not just a secret; there kindness and compassion to benefit all beings. So is a culture of secrecy. Acts of deception, Avalokiteshvara made a great vow, from every pore of enabling, and dissimulation sometimes their body, to help all beings find liberation. become so habitual that they seem perfectly Avalokiteshvara worked tirelessly for many ages, normal, like brushing your teeth.”5 helping innumerous beings. One day they wondered if any of their work had made a difference. They Lama Willa demonstrates the scanned the entire universe and to their dismay, interrelatedness of these precepts that make nothing had changed! The number of beings suffering them so important. It is not just a couple had not decreased! They remembered that “sentient of precepts that are being broken (e.g., beings are numberless,” and realized their task was misusing sexuality and dishonoring one’s impossible and gave up, thus breaking their vow. body and dignity). But breaking any of them creates an enabling community and Amitabha, the Future Buddha, took pity culture to do harm onto each other. This on Avalokiteshvara. Amitabha transformed goes against the Tenth Precept too—not Avalokiteshvara’s skull into eleven heads, ten of disparaging the Buddha, Dharma and them benevolent and one wrathful for protection. Sangha—for harming of any sangha Amitabha also gave Avalokiteshvara a thousand member disparages the Buddha, Dharma, arms to carry out their work, and a thousand eyes and Sangha simultaneously because all placed on the palm of each hand to better see all the manifest in each individual. work that needs to be done. Amitabha encouraged Avalokiteshvara again to not give up, to renew their Therefore, sexual and teacher misconduct vow, and to remember that the world of suffering is not only harm specific sangha members, beginningless and endless, thus to better enjoy this but the entire community and goes against tireless work for the sake of all beings until [the world the essence of the Dharma, which can be of suffering] ends. found in the Bodhisattva vows. This is This story illustrates forgiveness, the work of the other level of violation. As the excerpt compassion, and the renewal of vow. Consider above shows, the former students of Sogyal how it may apply to your community in how it Rinpoche and members of the Rigpa responds to misconduct. community called attention to how their teacher created mistrust in the Dharma, and how they themselves felt complicit in this harm in an effort to uphold their vows to their teacher. While fault lies with the person perpetrating abuse (in this case, Sogyal Rinpoche), this example illustrates the deep and complex impact of abuse 5 Lama Willa Blythe Baker, “Breaking the Silence on Sexual Misconduct,” Lion’s Roar, May 19, 2018, https://www.lionsroar.com/ breaking-the-silence-on-sexual-misconduct. SECTION 1 18 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE in a community. In the end, abuse impacts individual and communal experiences of the Three Jewels of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. This brings us to the idea that Buddhist teachings alone may not be enough to prevent or respond to misconduct, especially when teachings are so often twisted by perpetrators to justify their behavior. One teacher we spoke to noted additional training is often needed because “[Buddhist] teachers are perhaps not always trained very well in what I call the pastoral aspects of our work.” They go on to share that, “Because of this lack of training, often in combination with a certain lack of insight into one’s own specific psychological patterns, trauma, and weaknesses, some spiritual teachers have made horrible mistakes or displayed repeated behavior that caused tremendous harm to the people and communities around them. My conclusion is that the traditional teachings, however profound and clear, may not suffice to safeguard communities, students and teachers and are not sufficient as a framework for training spiritual leaders.” Therefore, Buddhist teacher training may need to be supplemented with training that specifically connects key Buddhist principles and vows to the issues of misconduct, abuse, and power. (See Appendix: “The Buddha Would Have Believed You” by Bhante Sujato) 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 19 False Shepherds and True Shepherds (From Jewish and Christian Traditions) The texts that we provide here contrast the False Shepherd and the True Shepherd. Ezekiel 34 1 The word of the Lord God came to me: 2 Mortal, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel: prophesy, and say to them—to the shepherds: Thus says the Lord God: Ah, you shepherds of Israel who have been feeding yourselves! Should not shepherds feed the sheep? 3 You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, you slaughter the fatlings; but you do not feed the sheep. 4 You have not strengthened the weak, you have not healed the sick, you have not bound up the injured, you have not brought back the strayed, you have not sought the lost, but with force and harshness you have ruled them. 5 So they were scattered, because there was no shepherd; and scattered, they became food for all the wild animals. 6 My sheep were scattered, they wandered over all the mountains and on every high hill; my sheep were scattered over all the face of the earth, with no one to search or seek for them. 7 Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the Lord: 8 As I live, says the Lord God, because my sheep have become a prey, and my sheep have become food for all the wild animals, since there was no shepherd; and because my shepherds have not searched for my sheep, but the shepherds have fed themselves, and have not fed my sheep; 9 therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the Lord: 10 Thus says the Lord God, I am against the shepherds; and I will demand my sheep at their hand, and put a stop to their feeding the sheep; no longer shall the shepherds feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their mouths, so that they may not be food for them. God, the True Shepherd 11 For thus says the Lord God: I myself will search for my sheep, and will seek them out. 12 As shepherds seek out their flocks when they are among their scattered sheep, so I will seek out my sheep. I will rescue them from all the places to which they have been scattered on a day of clouds and thick darkness. 13 I will bring them out from the peoples and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their own land; and I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the watercourses, and in all the inhabited parts of the land. 14 I will feed them with good pasture, and the mountain heights of Israel shall be their pasture; there they shall lie down in good grazing land, and they shall feed on rich pasture on the mountains of Israel. 15 I myself will be the shepherd of my sheep, and I will make them lie down, says the Lord God. 16 I will seek the lost, and I will bring back the strayed, and I will bind up the injured, and I will strengthen the weak, but the fat and the strong I will destroy. I will feed them with justice. 17 As for you, my flock, thus says the Lord God: I shall judge between sheep and sheep, between rams and goats: 18 Is it not enough for you to feed on the good pasture, but you must tread down with your feet the rest of your pasture? When you drink of clear water, must you foul the rest with your feet? 19 And must my sheep eat what you have trodden with your feet, and drink what you have fouled with your feet? 20 Therefore, thus says the Lord God to them: I myself will judge between the fat sheep and the lean SECTION 1 20 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE sheep. 21 Because you pushed with flank and shoulder, and butted at all the weak animals with your horns until you scattered them far and wide, 22 I will save my flock, and they shall no longer be ravaged; and I will judge between sheep and sheep. 23 I will set up over them one shepherd, my servant David, and he shall feed them: he shall feed them and be their shepherd. 24 And I, the Lord, will be their God, and my servant David shall be prince among them; I, the Lord, have spoken. 25 I will make with them a covenant of peace and banish wild animals from the land, so that they may live in the wild and sleep in the woods securely. 26 I will make them and the region around my hill a blessing; and I will send down the showers in their season; they shall be showers of blessing. 27 The trees of the field shall yield their fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase. They shall be secure on their soil; and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I break the bars of their yoke, and save them from the hands of those who enslaved them. 28 They shall no more be plunder for the nations, nor shall the animals of the land devour them; they shall live in safety, and no one shall make them afraid. 29 I will provide for them splendid vegetation so that they shall no more be consumed with hunger in the land, and no longer suffer the insults of the nations. 30 They shall know that I, the Lord their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people, says the Lord God. 31 You are my sheep, the sheep of my pasture and I am your God, says the Lord God. (NRSV) In Hebrew scripture, the prophet Ezekiel (Chapter 34) describes the false shepherds. These are the shepherds that meet their own needs by taking from the flock they are supposed to be shepherding and that fail to protect and care for the flock, which is their job. Ezekiel bemoans all of this and is clearly speaking to the public figures of his day using the shepherd metaphor—effective no doubt because the people knew that the customary practice for shepherds was that they did not take sheep from their own flock for their needs. The point was that the shepherd was entrusted with the care of the flock in order to ensure the wellbeing of the whole community, who relied on the flock as a resource. God condemns the false shepherds for their disregard of the well-being of the flock and for their misuse of their roles. Then, ironically, the text (v. 23) says that God will establish David to be the real shepherd. Let’s look at David. 2 Samuel 11 1 In the spring of the year, the time when kings go out to battle, David sent Joab with his officers and all Israel with him; they ravaged the Ammonites, and besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem. 2 It happened, late one afternoon, when David rose from his couch and was walking about on the roof of the king’s house, that he saw from the roof a woman bathing; the woman was very beautiful. 3 David sent someone to inquire about the woman. It was reported, “This is Bathsheba daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite.” 4 So David sent messengers to get her, and she came to him, and he lay with her. (Now she was purifying herself after her period.) Then she returned to her house. 5 The woman conceived; and she sent and told David, “I am pregnant.” 6 So David sent word to Joab, “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” And Joab sent Uriah to David. 7 When Uriah came to him, David asked how Joab and the people fared, and how the war was going. 8 Then David said to Uriah, “Go down to your house, and wash your feet.” Uriah went out of the king’s house, and there followed him a present from the king. 9 But Uriah slept at the entrance of the king’s 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 21 house with all the servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house. 10 When they told David, “Uriah did not go down to his house,” David said to Uriah, “You have just come from a journey. Why did you not go down to your house?” 11 Uriah said to David, “The ark and Israel and Judah remain in booths; and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field; shall I then go to my house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As you live, and as your soul lives, I will not do such a thing.” 12 Then David said to Uriah, “Remain here today also, and tomorrow I will send you back.” So Uriah remained in Jerusalem that day. On the next day, 13 David invited him to eat and drink in his presence and made him drunk; and in the evening he went out to lie on his couch with the servants of his lord, but he did not go down to his house. David Has Uriah Killed 14 In the morning David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah. 15 In the letter he wrote, “Set Uriah in the forefront of the hardest fighting, and then draw back from him, so that he may be struck down and die.” 16 As Joab was besieging the city, he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew there were valiant warriors. 17 The men of the city came out and fought with Joab; and some of the servants of David among the people fell. Uriah the Hittite was killed as well. 18 Then Joab sent and told David all the news about the fighting; 19 and he instructed the messenger, “When you have finished telling the king all the news about the fighting, 20 then, if the king’s anger rises, and if he says to you, ‘Why did you go so near the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the wall? 21 Who killed Abimelech son of Jerubbaal? Did not a woman throw an upper millstone on him from the wall, so that he died at Thebez? Why did you go so near the wall?’ then you shall say, ‘Your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead too.’” 22 So the messenger went, and came and told David all that Joab had sent him to tell. 23 The messenger said to David, “The men gained an advantage over us, and came out against us in the field; but we drove them back to the entrance of the gate. 24 Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall; some of the king’s servants are dead; and your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.” 25 David said to the messenger, “Thus you shall say to Joab, ‘Do not let this matter trouble you, for the sword devours now one and now another; press your attack on the city, and overthrow it.’ And encourage him.” 26 When the wife of Uriah heard that her husband was dead, she made lamentation for him. 27 When the mourning was over, David sent and brought her to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a son. (NRSV) 2 Samuel 12 1 And the Lord sent Nathan to David. He came to him, and said to him, “There were two men in a certain city, the one rich and the other poor. 2 The rich man had very many flocks and herds; 3 but the poor man had nothing but one little ewe lamb, which he had bought. He brought it up, and it grew up with him and with his children; it used to eat of his meager fare, and drink from his cup, and lie in his bosom, and it was like a daughter to him. 4 Now there came a traveler to the rich man, and he was loath to take one of his own flock or herd to prepare for the wayfarer who had come to him, but he took the poor man’s lamb, and prepared that for the guest who had come to him.” 5 Then David’s anger was greatly kindled against the man. He said to Nathan, “As the Lord lives, the man who has done this deserves to die; 6 he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.” SECTION 1 22 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE This is a well-known story. King David spots Bathsheba and wants to have sex with her. He sends for her and impregnates her. We are not told how she felt about any of this, but consent is not apparent. Now she is pregnant, and David believes he has to cover this up. He sends for Bathsheba’s soldier husband who is away fighting the war. Uriah comes to David, who rewards him and tells him to go home and have sex with his wife. Uriah refuses because his comrades are still fighting, and he does not feel that he should take advantage of this special treatment. The next night David got him drunk, but still Uriah did not go to his wife. David’s plan to get Uriah to have sex with his wife in order to appear to be responsible for her pregnancy failed. His next plan was to send Uriah back to the front with instructions to his commander that he be put in the front line where he would surely be killed. The report came back that he was in fact killed in battle. Bathsheba mourned for the loss of her husband. David then sent for her and married her so that the child she bore then was assumed to be his. The ethical analysis of this situation follows in the text: God was not pleased with David, and God sent Nathan to confront him. See how Nathan frames the confrontation. He does not talk about adultery or even about sex. He talks about power. He tells David a story: There was a rich man and a poor man. The rich man had many sheep. The poor man had one lamb that he had bought and raised in his family. She was “like a daughter to him,” the text says. The rich man had a visitor and instead of taking one of his own sheep to provide for the visitor, he instead took the poor man’s lamb to be the meal for his guest. David responds with anger and condemns the rich man to death, adding that he should restore the poor man fourfold what he took from him. Nathan responds with those now classic words, “You are the man.” God’s confrontation of David was delivered through Nathan. The story of the rich and poor man is the heart of the ethical analysis here. David is called to account not for having sex per se, but for misusing his power over and over to take things that were not his: Bathsheba herself and Uriah’s life. His sin is theft, and theft was only an option for him because he was King. Few others could have accomplished these deeds with impunity. Nathan is unrelenting in his call to accountability, and the consequences he pronounces are far reaching: “The sword shall never depart from your house.” David finally gets it and confesses his sin. Nathan tells him that he will not die because of God’s mercy, but that his child will die, which happens right after birth. David is held accountable and experiences consequences. The misuse of power is punished. However, David is respected and revered, a hero to his people, a charismatic leader chosen by God. This image of David makes this story all the more important to our spiritual communities. One who brings great gifts to leadership can also be one who betrays the trust of their people on his way to breaking at least four of the Ten Commandments. Thankfully, God sent Nathan to confront David, speaking truth to power. For those of you who are using this handbook to guide your responses to complaints of clergy 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 23 misconduct, you are the Nathans in our midst, called and sent by God to see clearly, to name unequivocally, and to act to make justice and bring healing to the faith community. “You Shall Not Steal” For those who are survivors of abuse by spiritual leaders or other trusted helpers, there is often an attempt to articulate the experience in moral terms. Frequently, survivors use such phrases as “what I lost” to describe the consequences of the betrayal of trust they experience. In this they are reaching for a moral norm by which to establish the wrongness of their experience. Of course the flaw here is that this language of “loss” completely avoids agency or responsibility on the part of the perpetrator. The passive voice of loss ultimately reflects on the survivor and their carelessness in “losing” something valuable. This is not surprising within a patriarchal context in which support for placing responsibility for an offense (betrayal of trust and violation of boundaries) on the person with power (parent, teacher, clergy) is unlikely, but it seriously distracts from a viable ethical norm that should focus on theft. This is not to revert to the property discussion above, but rather to acknowledge that something is in fact taken from the victim by the perpetrator that does not belong to them. It is not the property of one’s “sexual goods,” but rather the trust that the victim carries in one’s world, in relationships, and also in one’s future. The sexual abuse of a child means that that child’s future is dramatically impacted and, for better or worse, will probably require some expenditure of energy and resources as an adult to address the childhood experience. A child’s future is stolen by sexual abuse. This does not mean that it cannot be recovered. However, if it weren’t for the actions of an adult who took something that did not belong to them, this child would have a very different future ahead. Sexual abuse or a sexual violation makes it clear that something has been taken away. Someone has taken another’s power away. Someone has stolen another’s bodily integrity. The power to decide, to choose, to determine, to consent, or to withhold consent in the most concrete bodily dimension all vanish in the face of a rapist or child abuser. The sin of sexual abuse brings us back to the Ten Commandments. It is not the Seventh Commandment, “You shall not commit adultery,” that should concern us. The problem with sexual violence is not that it represents sex outside of marriage. Rather, it is the Eighth Commandment, “You shall not steal” (Deuteronomy 5:19 and Exodus 20:15). It is the theft by the assailant of the security and well-being of the victim, the betrayal of trust, and the theft of their future. Let’s be clear. It is not property theft, i.e. the taking of the property belonging to the male head of household. It is the theft of the sense of self of the person who is abused. Their boundaries are violated, trust is betrayed, and relationships are often broken by the theft of the abuser. John 10:1-10 1 “Very truly, I tell you, anyone who does not enter the sheepfold by the gate but climbs in by another way is a thief and a bandit. 2 The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. 4 When he has brought out all his own, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they know his voice. 5 They will not follow a stranger, but they will run from him because they do not know the voice of strangers.” 6 Jesus used this figure of speech with them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them. SECTION 1 24 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE 7 So again Jesus said to them, “Very truly, I tell you, I am the gate for the sheep. 8 All who came before me are thieves and bandits; but the sheep did not listen to them. 9 I am the gate. Whoever enters by me will be saved, and will come in and go out and find pasture. 10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly. (NRSV) In Christian teaching, Jesus establishes trust as fundamental to his message. The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd, appointed to care for and protect the sheep. If Jesus is the gate, then we are offered this model for the ministries we carry out. Jesus contrasts this role with that of the thief who “comes only to steal and kill and destroy.” How does the thief gain access to the sheep? By pretending to be a trustworthy shepherd. Psalm 23 1 Yhwh, you are my shepherd— I want nothing more. 2 You let me lie down in green meadows; you lead me beside restful waters: 3 you refresh my soul. You guide me to lush pastures for the sake of your Name. 4 Even if I’m surrounded by shadows of Death, I fear no danger, for you are with me. Your rod and your staff— they give me courage. 5 You spread a table for me in the presence of my enemies, and you anoint my head with oil— my cup overflows! 6 Only goodness and love will follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in your house, Yhwh, for days without end. (Inclusive Bible) The image of the sheep and shepherd appear regularly in both Hebrew and Christian scriptures. Clearly, this image and metaphor carried great meaning. Here in Psalm 23, we have the description of God as the Good Shepherd, which is also a description of ministry for those of us called into leadership as shepherds. We have a description of the safety and reassurance that come with living in God’s house. Commentary by Rabbi Mark Dratch It goes without saying that no one is perfect. Every human being makes mistakes, suffers failures, and behaves improperly: “For there is not a righteous person upon earth, that does good, and does not sin” (Ecclesiastes 7:20). And those in positions of leadership and power face even greater challenges than do the masses. They are fallible. At times they are unable to fulfill properly the demands of their positions or to resolve appropriately the tensions and conflicting demands of their congregations. They are subject to temptations like every other human being, and sometimes, 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 25 like others, they succumb. At times they are unable to withstand the enticements and trappings of their offices. The Torah itself hints to us that our leaders will certainly fail: “When the leader sins” (Leviticus 4:22) it says, not “if.”1 Nevertheless, imperfection and error do not automatically disqualify a person from serving in religious leadership—otherwise, we would have no leaders.2 All the same, religious leadership demands a high level of integrity. Religious leaders are moral and spiritual exemplars, representatives of God to the people they are charged to teach, inspire, counsel, and lead. The behavior of any religiously observant person—but especially that of a spiritual leader—is especially sensitive to being a Kiddush Hashem (a sanctification of God’s Name) as well as its converse, a hillul Hashem (a desecration of God’s Name). Their successes and their failings can and do reflect on the One they represent and impact the religious behaviors and beliefs of their adherents and students, both positively and negatively. When leaders are guilty of desecrating God’s Name, they betray God and foster disillusionment and even cynicism in the community. It is for this reason that the Talmud reminds us that when learned, religiously observant people are honest and pleasant, others are impressed with them and the spiritual tradition they represent.3 Conversely, when such people are dishonest or discourteous—to say nothing of abusive—others blame the tradition and God that they claim to represent. When spiritual leaders cross inviolable boundaries, they bring discredit to their calling and should be held accountable publicly. In fact, “wherever there is desecration of God’s Name, honor is not extended, even to a rabbi.”4 Leaders must be accountable for their wrongdoings. Allowing them or enabling them to violate the authority and privilege of their positions without any restraint or accountability undercuts the community’s trust, undermines adherence to the community’s values, alienates congregants from God, and allows victims to be continually and systemically revictimized by those individuals, institutions, and movements whose duty it is to protect them. Spiritual leaders are charged not only with teaching and preaching the wisdom of their faith, they are to model, through their behavior, its spiritual and moral lessons as well. Thus, the Talmud describes Rabbi Yehudah’s dilemma whether or not to excommunicate a rabbi “whose reputation was objectionable.” “To excommunicate him [we cannot], as the rabbis have need of him [as a capable teacher]; not to excommunicate him [we cannot] as the name of Heaven is being profaned.” Citing the verse “For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge and they should seek Torah at his mouth; for he is a malakh of the Lord of Hosts” (Malachi 2:7), the sage Rabbah bar Hanna instructed him to excommunicate this rabbi. The word malakh can be translated in two ways: angel and messenger. On the one hand, “if the clergy is like an angel of the Lord of Hosts, they should seek instruction from that clergy; but if [that clergy] is not [like an angel], they should not seek instruction.”5 Spiritual leaders must be more than just experts in ritual, bible, and theology. They must be, first and foremost, moral exemplars. After all, the study of religious texts is much more than an intellectual exercise, and spiritual leaders are more than just university professors. While one does not necessarily expect moral greatness from a professor of chemistry or literature, one absolutely requires it of religious teachers. How can clergy preach about repentance or ethics, if they themselves are unrepentant or unethical? How can they exhort others to be empathetic and charitable, if they are cruel or selfish? How can they represent a kind, compassionate, and loving 1 See Rashi to Horayot, s.v. shani. 2 The Talmud, Yoma 22b, dictates appointing as leader only those who “carry a basket of reptiles on their backs,” i.e., those with proverbial skeletons in their closets which serve as preventatives to excessive self statisfaction and arrogance. 3 Talumd, Yoma 86a. 4 Talmud, Berakhot 19b. 5 Mo’ed Katan 17a. SECTION 1 26 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE God if they are abusive? How can they bring others to a love of God, when their actions undermine divine values and teachings and serve to frustrate and alienate those who seek their guidance? This moral standard is a sine qua non. On the other hand, spiritual leaders are not angels—and elevating them to superhuman status is itself a problem; they are “merely” messengers of God. Congregants disillusioned by a failed leader need to be helped to understand that the fault and betrayal lie with the fallible and flawed human messenger, not with God and God’s teachings. They need to distinguish between God and the messenger. They need to understand when faith doctrines have been misinterpreted and misapplied so as to enable and perpetrate abuse. Their faith should not be undermined, but strengthened as they take ownership and responsibility for their relationship with God. R. Abraham Isaac Kook, the first Chief Rabbi of Israel, described himself—and, by extension, every rabbi—as an eved le-avdei Hashem, a servant of the servants of God. As such, he taught that the prime responsibility of clergy is for the physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being of the members of their community. At times, this mandate calls for protecting the reputation of the faith community at large and defending its leadership and institutions. At other times, however, it means taking serious stock of those very same leaders and institutions in order to make certain that they are upholding and furthering this mandate. If problems are uncovered, they must not be dismissed or hidden. In every case, the circumstances surrounding allegations and suspicions must be evaluated and determinations made as to how to properly respond. When spiritual leaders have violated the appropriate boundaries that define the respectful and proper relationship between them and their congregants, considerations for the welfare of the victims and the well-being of the community are priorities. The protection of the vulnerable and the innocent is always the first concern—what kind of community would it be otherwise?—and innocent individuals may never be sacrificed on the altar of institutional or denominational self interest. In this way, all members of the community—the servants of God, as well as the servants of those servants—will fulfill the biblical admonition that calls on each of us to sanctify the Name of Heaven, “And [God] said to me, ‘You are my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified’” (Isaiah 49:3). Conclusion The discussion of misconduct by spiritual leaders rests squarely in the context of our understanding of teaching, ministry, and leadership within the various spiritual communities. Within this context, our goal is to maintain the integrity of the ministerial/teaching relationship and protect the vulnerabilities of students/those whom we lead. It is imperative that those of us in spiritual leadership recognize the power that we have, that is given over to us by those whom we serve, and that we accept the responsibility of maintaining healthy boundaries in all our ministerial/teaching relationships. When we violate the boundaries of these relationships, we misuse our power and take advantage of others. When we do this, we shall be called to account. This handbook aims to prepare you to respond to disclosures of spiritual leader misconduct by providing foundational background information to the subject of misconduct and abuse, a solid ethical and theological understanding of the issues, and practical guidance for navigating your next steps. 1 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 27 The Scope of Spiritual Leader Misconduct Each individual spiritual leader is faced with ethical expectations in a professional role. These expectations include maintaining healthy boundaries in ministerial/teaching relationships, keeping confidences, and managing funds with integrity. Each individual spiritual leader is also faced with their own personal ethical challenges. Thus, violations of personal relationships (e.g. domestic violence, adultery, etc.), driving while intoxicated, or cheating on income taxes are personal ethical issues. This personal misconduct may or may not compromise one’s ministerial/teaching leadership. The policies of a congregation, judicatory, spiritual organization, or seminary should address professional ethical expectations rather than personal ones. Thus, the focus of this handbook is on professional ethics for spiritual leaders and the responsibilities of congregations, judicatories, spiritual organizations, and seminaries to have clear policies and to respond to violations of these policies. The Church, Synagogue, & Sangha as a Workplace The graphic below suggests the difference between “professional misconduct,” that is, misconduct in the role of a spiritual leader, and “personal misconduct,” or misconduct in one’s private life outside of one’s ministerial/teaching role. The upper half of the circle illustrates both a sexual and nonsexual example of professional misconduct. The lower half illustrates both a sexual and nonsexual example of personal misconduct. Areas of Professional Misconduct Example: Example: Sexualized Breach of behavior in confidentiality, teaching embezzlement relationships Sexual Non-Sexual Example: Example: Sexual Driving under harassment the influence AArreeaass ooff PPeerrssoonnaall MMiissccoonndduucctt As an example of personal non-sexual misconduct, suppose a Buddhist teacher is arrested for a DUI while on vacation with her family. This should only be a professional concern for her employer and personnel committee if it suggests that she is dealing with alcohol abuse. Otherwise it is not an SECTION 1 28 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE employment issue. Imagine, instead, that the teacher is arrested for a DUI while driving students or sangha members. Then we have a much bigger issue to address: this is professional non-sexual misconduct and a very serious breach of trust which could cost her her job. The point is that the policy should clearly describe what behaviors are considered misconduct. We encourage a distinction between private and professional behaviors unless the private behavior clearly compromises the professional behavior. So, there is a difference between a pastor having an affair with a peer colleague in a neighboring town and “having an affair” with a congregant. The first may or may not impact the pastor’s leadership (depending on the cultural norms and expectations of the community). The second is sexual professional misconduct and a betrayal of trust. 1 NOITCES