RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 179 Dynamic Models of Change Many theories of change include different modes of action working in concert across fields of experience. Current research shows that the most effective models of abuse prevention are “socio-ecological,” including individual, relational, communal, societal, structural, historical, environmental, and spiritual modes of action.7 Municipalities and other institutions in the United States are increasingly employing SARTs—Sexual Abuse Response Teams—made up of interdisciplinary, independent groups with distinct duties that work together to identify gaps and problems that interfere with supporting victims, holding offenders accountable, or keeping communities safe. A SART’s goal is to explore areas for systemic improvement.8 In spiritual communities, institutional leaders should not be expected to administer effective response processes and effect sustainable systems change alone. Embracing a dynamic model of internal-external interplay that includes advocacy for the most vulnerable can help. GRACE, a leading organization in church abuse prevention in the US, assists religious institutions in developing multidisciplinary “safeguarding teams.” These teams can assist with responding to misconduct as well as identifying and implementing improvements across areas of relevant expertise, from building safety to religious education to community accountability. Transformation as Preservation Our spiritual communities have room for improvement in policies, procedures, and culture toward the goal of preventing abuse. Moreover, healthy communities and organizations are always improving: as the world around us is perpetually reborn, we rise to meet each new challenge. To preserve our communities and institutions, we must build them to continually adapt. Institutional leaders and advocates generally agree in their goal of restoring right relationship after misconduct and preventing further harm, but conflict often arises with pressure to preserve a community or institution as it was. When the duty to preserve becomes the duty to support perpetual transformation, institutional leaders and advocates can work together as part of a powerful team for peace and justice. Suggested Citation: Sider Jost, Laura. “The Role of the Advocate,” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 175-179. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. 7 “Recommended Socio-Ecological Model for Abuse Prevention,” Black Women’s Blueprint, https://wiki.preventconnect.org/ wp-content/uploads/2018/08/f0223e_9d9d273646ec48ed9f8f576dd63d38ae.pdf. 8 Sexual Assault Response Team (SART) Toolkit, National Sexual Violence Resource Center, 2018, https://www.nsvrc.org/sarts/ toolkit. APPENDIX RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 181 Community Healing after Spiritual Leader Misconduct DARRYL W. STEPHENS Darryl W. Stephens holds a Ph.D. in Christian ethics from Emory University, is ordained in The United Methodist Church, and teaches at Lancaster Theological Seminary. He is author of numerous books and articles on ethics and ministry and maintains the blog ethicsconsidered.com. “Say no!” advised her clergy colleague. “Don’t even consider a move to Elmsdale Church. You don’t want to be in the middle of that mess of a congregation.” Pastor Kellie thought to herself, “I wonder what’s wrong with them?” Communities require intentional healing to overcome traumatic events. One of the most devastating traumas is sexual abuse by a spiritual leader. When a person in a position of ministerial or spiritual authority—lay or ordained, paid or volunteer—violates the sacred trust of that office by inappropriately crossing sexual boundaries, individuals and entire communities are harmed. In situations of communal trauma, instead of asking, “What is wrong with them?” Pastor Kellie should consider instead, “What has happened to them?” Changing the question in this manner shifts the emphasis from blame to care. The former question reinforces a dynamic that shames the collective victim, implying that they are somehow defective, complicit, and at fault for their circumstance. The latter question expresses empathy for the victimized congregation, offering pastoral accompaniment. This subtle difference in perspective signals a trauma-informed approach to community healing. The fictional Elmsdale Church scenario provides an entry point for discussing community healing after spiritual leader misconduct. Once the community has received crisis triage and guilt has been determined, there are long-term practices that can facilitate healing. The pastor serving after an incident of misconduct, the afterpastor, can engage the congregation in certain rituals, practices, and procedures to promote recovery and healing from its collective trauma. With more information, Pastor Kellie’s clergy colleague might have expressed her concern better by saying, “Elmsdale Church has been traumatized and needs an afterpastor to facilitate healing. Are you prepared for that role?” Trauma Misconduct by a person in spiritual leadership is an abuse of power and can be traumatic not only for the exploited individual but also for the entire spiritual community. Trauma is an event or APPENDIX 182 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE series of events experienced as harmful or life threatening with lasting adverse effects on everyday functioning and well-being. When an experience is too much to handle, it is experienced as trauma. Trauma overwhelms one’s normal coping mechanisms and involves a profound sense of powerlessness. One’s subjective response to a potentially traumatic event depends on personal resiliency—the capacity to bounce back from adversity. Resilience depends on many factors, including social support networks, and is compromised by previous traumatic experiences triggered by the current experience. Unfortunately, trauma is not unusual, and many people bear the effects of trauma in their everyday lives. Unhealed trauma prevents the survivor from being fully engaged in the present. Both individuals and groups can experience trauma. Collective trauma occurs when a group or community experiences an adversity that is too much to handle, overwhelming the community’s normal coping mechanisms. The diverse ways in which individuals within a community system experience an adverse communal event further complicate the effects of collective trauma. Stages of grief come into play. Individuals will experience the full range of denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance—and at different times and to different degrees. Some may experience vicarious trauma, empathetically identifying with a primary victim. Others may experience compassion fatigue as they care for others. Some may cause further harm by denying the violation that occurred or blaming a primary victim. Still others may have the resilience to weather the storm without becoming traumatized. A spiritual community wounded by its own trusted leader suffers a distinct type of trauma. People may question their faith, their beliefs about God, or theological truths they have held dear. Some people deal with this spiritual dissonance by refusing to believe what has happened. Others will want to move toward forgiveness quickly while still others may seek accountability from those in leadership. Some people will withdraw from the community, and more will follow if the community remains mired in dysfunction rather than healing. Many community members will distrust the pastoral office and the institution that it represents. The very resources that a community typically draws upon—its leadership, judicatory personnel, and integrity as a community of faith—are thrown into disarray, hampering recovery. Elmsdale Church is fortunate to have the clarity of adjudication. In this case, as it turns out, the former pastor was found guilty of sexually exploiting an adult congregant and was removed from ministry. Yet, members of the community exhibit a wide array of emotions, and some are in denial about the outcome of the church trial. Parishioners at Elmsdale will likely distrust the next pastor and the judicatory that credentialed her, since a previous pastor proved abusive. Thus, Pastor Kellie would begin her ministry at Elmsdale Church in an atmosphere of mistrust. All afterpastors face this reality. A trauma-informed response can assist with recovery and healing. Trauma-Informed Response To be trauma-informed is to realize how widespread trauma is, to recognize its signs and symptoms, to respond by integrating knowledge into practice, and to resist doing further harm.1 This four- 1 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, “SAMHSA’s Concept of Trauma and Guidance for a Trauma- Informed Approach” (Publication ID: SMA14-4884) October 2014, https://store.samhsa.gov/product/SAMHSA-s-Concept-of-Trauma- and-Guidance-for-a-Trauma-Informed-Approach/SMA14-4884, 9. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 183 fold description (realize, recognize, respond, and resist) provides guidance for leaders to become partners in recovery for survivors of trauma. A trauma-informed leader realizes that trauma is widespread. Many people in the community carry their own, often unacknowledged, trauma histories, such as being victimized by sexual assault. Likewise, many faith communities have unacknowledged trauma histories. In an anonymous survey of 1,800 United Methodist clergy, 50% reported having “served a church where sexual misconduct by a ministerial leader occurred in its history.”2 The situation of Elmsdale Church is unusual only in that their offender was found guilty and held accountable. Across traditions and faiths, most cases of misconduct by a spiritual leader are unreported, unadjudicated, and unresolved. Many spiritual communities suffer from unaddressed trauma, and these traumatic wounds do not heal on their own. Symptoms can last for decades in the absence of intentional practices of healing. A trauma-informed leader recognizes the signs of past trauma, even when the source of the trauma is unknown. In a spiritual community, indicators of an incomplete recovery from past leader misconduct include: • Perpetual staff changes • Lack of appropriate boundaries • Reluctance to change • Anger, helplessness, or disconnection under stress • Withdrawal and isolation from the larger community or judicatory • Secrecy and lack of transparency in communications • Overly rigid approach to traditions, roles, and relationships These symptoms are due to underlying fear, unresolved anxiety, and lingering distrust. Communities express these symptoms through seemingly irrational, controlling, and obsessive behaviors. For example, a strong current of overt anger in the community is often a surface expression of generalized distrust. While most spiritual communities exhibit one or two of these symptoms, the co-occurrence of several or more dysfunctions could be an indication of unresolved trauma in the community. When signs of unresolved trauma are present in a community, a trauma-informed leader responds by applying knowledge of trauma through intentional practices of healing and by resisting doing further harm to the community. Instead of casting blame (“What is wrong with you?”), trauma-informed responders provide care (“What has happened to you?”). The event of trauma is something that happens to a person, overwhelming them; healing and recovery is a process that happens with a person, inclusive of them. The same is true for traumatized communities. Individuals and communities suffering from the effects of misconduct by a trusted spiritual leader need to be cared for with intention throughout their healing and recovery journey. 2 Unpublished data collected by the author. APPENDIX 184 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Practices of Healing and Recovery Specific practices can promote healing and recovery within a faith community following misconduct by a spiritual leader. A trauma-informed process of communal healing values safety, trustworthiness, empowerment, collaboration, and cultural and contextual sensitivity.3 These values serve as antidotes to the abuse of power, violation of trust, coercion, secrecy, and disempowerment typically characterizing misconduct by a spiritual leader. Immediate crisis intervention by support personnel (such as a misconduct response team) prioritizes the physical and psychological safety of primary victims, emergency communications, and triage. Once the immediate crisis has abated, intentional practices of healing can promote long-term recovery and healing within a community of faith. The following practices are illustrative and do not provide a sequential process of steps to be followed. Each practice must be adapted to the contextual realities of the community and its situation. Reasserting Healthy Boundaries Misconduct by a spiritual leader is, by definition, an inappropriate crossing of professional boundaries. A person in leadership has abused the power of their office. Traumatized individuals and communities need to feel safe to begin healing from a violation. Reasserting healthy boundaries, including transparency of communications, is of foremost importance for re-establishing safety and trust in a community. Healthy boundaries can be reasserted through policies, protocols, communication, and practices. Safe church/community policies designed to protect children, youth, vulnerable adults, and those who care for them are essential, even if the violation that occurred involved only adults. Often, it is easier for community members to understand the need for policies when children are involved, laying the groundwork for more difficult discussions of power and vulnerability among adults. Sexual ethics policies for staff and other ministerial leaders, protocols for handling money and financial auditing, rules for giving and receiving gifts, expectations about time management and what constitutes a pastoral emergency—all of these are important ways of communicating and establishing healthy boundaries in ministry. Then these boundaries must be put into practice. Rituals of Grieving and Lament The removal of a spiritual leader for misconduct is a type of loss. Whenever a community suffers a significant loss, it is important to allow time for grieving and lament. Rituals of lament provide opportunity for embodied anguish through prayer, song, and art, allowing the community to worship together, transcending differences of opinion and experience.4 Victim-survivors should be included in planning and leadership. During traumatic events, victims are overwhelmed and feel a lack of agency. Collaborating with victim-survivors in the healing process allows them to regain a sense of agency. Trauma specialists refer to survivors’ “voice and choice” as essential to healing and recovery. Allow individual victim-survivors to set the pace of their own involvement. 3 Adapted from Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, “SAMHSA’s Concept of Trauma,” 10–11. 4 See Joan Huyser-Honig, “Trauma-Informed Care in Church Worship and Life,” Calvin Institute of Christian Worship, March 24, 2020, https://worship.calvin.edu/resources/resource-library/trauma-informed-care-in-church-worship-and-life/; and Institute for Collective Trauma and Growth, “Tools for Worship,” https://www.ictg.org/tools-for-worship.html. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 185 A complicating factor in the case of misconduct is that persons in the community will grieve different losses and for different reasons. Some may grieve the loss of beloved pastor. Others may grieve the loss of a certain image of God, who should have protected the victims from abuse, or a sense of safety and security in their spiritual community. Still others may grieve the loss of “the way things used to be”—whatever that may look like to them. Furthermore, sexual misconduct may be surrounded by shame and secrecy due to social stigmas regarding the topic of sexuality in general. Such complex and multifaceted grieving is aided by rituals of communal lament, in which members of the community may feel permission to question God, express their disappointment in and anger toward the institution of their faith community and/or its leadership, and face the world’s brokenness. There is no set timeline for these practices to occur. Some may feel the community should have moved on by a certain point. Again, the primary victim-survivors will set the pace for this work, which will not be resolved on an arbitrary timeline. Community Truth-Telling Telling and bearing witness to the truth of what happened is essential for coming to terms with a traumatic event. When misconduct by a spiritual leader has not been formally acknowledged through adjudication, the truth-telling is much more difficult. In some cases of unresolved past trauma, the first step is to bring the congregation to a realization that the dysfunctions they are experiencing are the result of sexual misconduct that happened years ago. Only when harm is acknowledged can the community bear witness to victim-survivors. For truth-telling to contribute to healing, the focus and priority must be on hearing from survivors, though no victim should be required to share their story. The congregation can bear witness to survivors, even if there remains division within the congregation. Allowing adult victim-survivors to tell their truths can be empowering when done in a safe environment. Ground rules, a covenant of civility, and assurance of appropriate confidentiality should be put in place. This is not the appropriate occasion for an offender to speak—even penitently. Leaders should collaborate with victim-survivors to maximize their choices and allow them voice in planning a communal practice of truth-telling. Community truth-telling may include stories from secondary victims and others negatively affected in the community. For example, cases of spiritual leader misconduct may involve institutional betrayal, in which judicatory leaders compound an initial act of misconduct through lack of transparency, cover-up, or complicity. Harmful acts of institutional self-protection may be part of the truth that needs to be told and lamented. Creating a safe space for sharing may also elicit previously untold stories of abuse within the same community. Furthermore, hearing stories of abuse may trigger traumatic memories unconnected to the presenting incident. Faith leaders must be prepared to respond to and support such disclosures and reactions. Forgiveness and Reconciliation Forgiveness is only appropriate toward the end of a process of healing, and even then, forgiveness does not mean forgetting or lack of accountability. When a person has egregiously abused the power APPENDIX 186 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE of their office, it is in the best interests of everyone, including the offender, not to give them that power again. This kind of accountability is fully consistent with forgiveness and may be the most loving course of action. Victim-survivors should never be pushed to forgive an offender. In all cases, it is important not to rush to forgiveness. Likewise, reconciliation should not be forced or rushed. In many cases of sexual abuse, reconciliation does not mean that a victim-survivor and offender are able to live harmoniously in the same community. Being reconciled with God may be enough. A community can reconcile itself to its past while still holding the offender accountable. Integrating a Painful Past into the Community Narrative For healing, a faith community must integrate the traumatic experience into its community narrative. Integrating a painful past into the community story requires long-term work. Outside facilitators, such as members of a misconduct response team, can provide expertise and skills to guide a community through this journey. There are many creative ways that spiritual communities have learned to integrate and heal from their trauma stories. Creating a shrine or physical space of remembrance can assist with healing. Ritually reclaiming adulterated spaces in the building can provide survivors a sense of psychological and spiritual safety. Removing physical reminders, such as a photograph of the offending pastor, might be part of the reclaiming of space. Intentional rituals of remembrance on significant dates, anniversaries, or events can help the community reclaim the narrative while acknowledging the past. Creating a community timeline is another way of remembering traumatic events while not allowing them to define the community’s narrative. Final Words Communities can heal after misconduct by a spiritual leader. Chances are good that most spiritual leaders will at some point serve after misconduct, whether they realize it or not. Elmsdale Church is not alone in its struggle. It can yet become a healthy community through intentional, trauma- informed practices, guided by Pastor Kellie or another afterpastor. Suggested Citation: Stephens, Darryl W. “Community Healing after Spiritual Leader Misconduct.” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 181-186. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 187 The Buddha Would Have Believed You BHANTE SUJATO Bhante Sujato is an Australian Theravada Buddhist monk and cofounder of the website SuttaCentral, which provides free translations of early Buddhist teachings alongside the texts in their original languages. He lives in Sydney at Lokanta Vihara, the Monastery at the End of the World, which he established in 2019 with his student. This article was republished with permission by Lion’s Roar.1 People come to community because they are suffering. They are looking for comfort and healing; they join in community to lift each other up, to give each other strength, to believe in each other when they can no longer believe in themselves. A spiritual community is nothing if it cannot take care of its most vulnerable. Unfortunately, communities sometimes fail. There are too any cases in which spiritual leaders—whether monastics, teachers, or supposedly enlightened gurus—have abused their position, taking advantage of the very people they are meant to protect. Sexual violations within a community are especially damaging, as for some, it is the one place that is seen as pure and safe in a corrupt and dangerous world. If even here is fraught with abuse, what hope to find sanctuary anywhere else? One of the tragedies of sexual assault is how hard it is for survivors to find justice. They suffer terrible trauma, only to undergo a second trauma at the hands of the justice system. They know there is only a small chance of bringing their abusers to justice, and yet if they say nothing, they live with the knowledge that their abusers are still out there and, in all likelihood, harming others. It is critical, then, that every Buddhist community, whether the traditional monastic sangha or contemporary lay-centered groups, have an explicit and responsible procedure for dealing with sexual abuse within their walls. Assume that it is not a matter of if but when. And in monastic communities, it is essential to support the order of fully ordained women (bhikkhuni). Without them, the monks have no female peers, no sisters and equals to stand up for women and call monks out on their blind spots. The principles laid down by the Buddha for addressing sexual misconduct were strikingly progressive, though they sometimes seem to have been honored more in the breach than the observance. It is worth taking some time to understand these procedures, which are relevant both as rules for monastics and as examples for lay communities. Sexual assault or harassment is frequently discussed in the Vinaya, the Buddhist monastic codes. There are several Vinayas in existence, each of which can trace its origins back to the time of 1 Bhante Sujato, “The Buddha Would Have Believed You,” Lion’s Roar, October 1, 2021, https://www.lionsroar.com/the-buddha- would-have-believed-you. APPENDIX 188 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE the Buddha. They share a core of rules and procedures, but the explanations and stories differ somewhat, as they were settled and organized in the few centuries following the Buddha’s life. Each represents a historical school of Buddhism in India, only three of which survive and are practiced today: the Theravada Vinaya in Pali, the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya in Chinese translation, and the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya in Tibetan translation. While variations reflect the fact that these texts were the products of communities in different schools or traditions, the basic rules are common among all the traditions and must stem from the earliest community. The Buddha took an active part in guiding the monastic communities—but perhaps not how you think. If you are expecting a system of hierarchical control and unquestioning obedience to the teacher, then the Buddha has some surprises in store for you. The Vinaya texts organize the sangha as an anarchist collective: consensus decision making, property held in common, full community participation, and no power of command or hierarchical authority. Even in a student–teacher relationship, the student is explicitly instructed to disobey the teacher if they ask them to do something that is against the Dhamma. Crucially, there is no assumption of male superiority, nor any allowance for monks to give any commands to nuns at all, in any context. Nuns ran their own lives, and apart from a few points of procedure, were entirely independent of the monks. When an accusation is made against a male monastic, there is a strong presumption of innocence— in most cases, a monastic can only be found guilty of an offense if they confess. And it is that last point that is especially relevant here. It is the old problem of sexual assault: who do we believe? The order of nuns was established after that of monks, and in some ways is positioned as an adjunct to the male sangha; for example, the nuns inherit many of the monks’ rules. While modern Buddhist apologists for patriarchy use this to undermine women’s ordination, it is under-appreciated how much the rules of the Vinaya protect women. Sometimes it is the simple things—monks are prohibited, for example, from getting nuns to do their laundry, and are restricted in accepting their alms-food. Today, however, in Buddhist communities where full ordination for women is opposed, it is common to find nuns spending much of their day in the laundry or cooking food. When monastic women are stripped of the protections offered by the Vinaya, the patriarchy reasserts itself, prioritizing the needs of men. It takes women out of the meditation hall or Dhamma seat and puts them literally back in the kitchen. The #MeToo movement has highlighted both the horrifying prevalence of sexual assault and the critical importance of believing women. This is especially important when dealing with an organized patriarchal institution. Under patriarchy, men monopolize real estate and physical assets while arrogating moral superiority and infallibility. When accused, the institution falls behind the man, arguing that its own existence is more important than the lives of women. We have seen this happen countless times: in Hollywood and the music business, in sports and colleges, in families and churches, in the highest courts and parliaments, even in the White House. Buddhist centers are no different. So long as power is concentrated in the hands of men, the same dynamics will recur. It’s only a matter of time. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 189 This situation is dealt with in the Vinaya through two special rules called Aniyata, which means “uncertain, undecided.” These rules only apply in the case of accusations against monks by women and require that the male sangha take such accusations seriously. The “uncertainty” here refers to the proper way of dealing with an accusation. Unlike other rules, which dictate that a certain transgression demands a certain response, here the sangha must first determine the nature of the transgression. The two Aniyata rules are similar; the second merely has a narrower scope, and I’ll pass over it here. Here’s the first: Suppose a monk were to sit alone with a woman in a private and concealed place convenient for having sex. And suppose a trustworthy laywoman, seeing him, were to accuse him of one of three offenses, either [sexual intercourse] entailing expulsion, [sexual contact or lewd speech] entailing suspension, or [dubious intentions] entailing confession. The mendicant who admits sitting in this way must be dealt with according to whichever one of these three offences applies, or according to what the trustworthy laywoman has said. This rule is undetermined [aniyata]. Like all Vinaya rules, this was prompted by a specific circumstance and deals with a narrow range of cases. It is not meant to be a complete policy. Nevertheless, it does raise a range of relevant issues. The responsibility is unquestionably on the monk. There is no hint that the woman who is sexually involved is in any way culpable, nor is the accuser. This, of course, stands in rather stark contrast with contemporary cases, in which the character and morality of the women involved immediately comes under scrutiny and attack. There is no “boys will be boys”; he is an adult and must take responsibility for his actions. Also, there is no question of protecting the institution by a cover-up or denial. The Buddha understood that an institution is served by truth and accountability. As this is a case dealing with a vowed celibate, any sexual behavior is out of bounds. In broader context, the problem is nonconsensual or otherwise inappropriate misconduct. While consent does not come up in this rule, in the Vinaya it is a central component of sexual morality, the dividing line that marks an action as assault. In a spiritual community, moreover, the relation between a monastic or teacher and student is not equal, and the very possibility of consent becomes blurred. Much like a relationship between an employer and employee, or therapist and client, things get messy fast. Even if the teacher is not a celibate monastic, such unequal relationships are wide open to manipulation and abuse and should be completely avoided. Another striking phrase here is the idea of a “trustworthy” laywoman. The Pali is saddheyyavacasa, literally “whose words are believable.” The rule thus places believing women at its core. And this gets to the heart of the he-said-she-said problem. What exactly does “trustworthy” mean here? It is not a technical term, so it should be read as an ordinary-language phrase. In other words, it means just what it seems to mean: someone whose testimony is reliable. APPENDIX 190 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE But how are we to know who is trustworthy? In the background story, the monk Udayin visited a family he knew well and found that the daughter had been recently married. He went to see her in her bedroom and sat chatting with her in private. The laywoman Visakha also happened to visit the family, and she called out Udayin on his inappropriate behavior. She was a prominent member of the community, well-known to the Buddha and the sangha, so clearly she was regarded as trustworthy. But not every woman is so well-known in the community. What then? Where lies the burden of belief when a woman accuses a man of sexual transgression? For the man’s part, that’s easy: when accused, men will almost always deny it, implying the woman is lying. Thus a man’s denial is of little weight. On the other hand, it is difficult to estimate the reliability of accusations of sexual misconduct by women, and I don’t know of any that cover the same situation as envisaged in the Aniyatas. However, there have been several studies of reliability in the case of rape. These typically analyze information provided by the police, and most conclude that the rate of false accusations is around 4 percent, give or take. That’s extremely low. And obviously, if two or more women make an accusation against a man, the probability of his innocence becomes vanishingly small. Women’s testimony is reliable when reporting rape. So it is reasonable to assume that it will be no less reliable when it comes to other forms of sexual accusation. This all suggests that rather than restricting trustworthiness to a tiny circle of women who meet certain Dhamma criteria, we should extend it to women in general. Response to accusations of sexual violation should focus on the woman’s protection and well-being, while holding the man accountable. But in the Buddhist world, as in the world at large, we still find that in cases of sexual assault, people believe the men, who often lie, over the women, who almost always tell the truth. I recall an example in which this is exactly what happened, and the monks, though following the supposedly strict Vinaya practice of the Thai forest tradition, did not follow the rule. In this case, a laywoman was staying in a center. She was a respected meditation teacher in her own right, the very definition of a trustworthy laywoman. Some recently arrived monks were at that time in charge of the place. She witnessed inappropriate sexual behavior by one of the junior monks, who was flirting with a younger woman. In keeping with her responsibilities, she told the senior monk. The monks discussed it, the junior monk denied it, and the senior monk dismissed the accusations. But it was all true. It became clear that the junior monk was spiraling, and he soon disrobed. The senior monk disrobed some time later. There was no justice or accountability, but the laywoman learned an important lesson about the patriarchy. No longer trusted or trusting, she left the center, a place she had contributed to far more than those monks. Notice how crucial the control over real estate is to the patriarchy. This is the ultimate source of power—to control who stays and who goes. And they get to ascend the high seat from which they can prescribe what is right and what is wrong. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 191 Does this mean that we risk the false conviction of innocent men? Not all patriarchs are abusers, even if they support an institution that enables abuse. And as we have noted, the Vinaya in general holds a very high standard of presumption of innocence. Typically, a monk or nun cannot be held guilty until they have actually confessed. The Aniyata rules appear to present an exception to this. This creates a tension between the presumption of innocence and the emphasis on believing the woman’s testimony. As we have seen, contemporary studies show that a woman’s testimony is reliable, thus supporting the exceptional case of the Aniyata rules. It should be noted that the Pali Vibhanga, the old commentary on the rules, undoes this, requiring that the monk confess. However, if we compare Vinaya texts of different schools, we find that most of them—namely, the Mahasanghika, Mulasarvastivada, Sarvastivada, and Dharmaguptaka—allow legal action to be taken solely on the basis of the woman’s accusation, although each works out the exact details somewhat differently. In this case, the Pali Vibhanga is clearly the exception, and does not represent the consensus of the ancient Indian sangha. In addition, in the Pali Vibhanga, the slightest flaw in the woman’s testimony is sufficient to dismiss the whole case. For example, if she says, “I saw you sitting down having sex with a woman,” and he says, “I wasn’t sitting but lying down,” then he gets away with it. The rule laid down by the Buddha emphasizes believing women and holding men accountable. The Vibhangas, written some centuries later—with the notable exception of the Dharmaguptaka—shift the focus to exonerating men and disbelieving women. The medieval Pali commentary Samantapasadika, by Acariya Buddhaghosa, justifies this by pointing out that sometimes what is seen is not what really happened. He is not suggesting that the woman is lying, merely that she may be mistaken. However, the Thai commentary Vinayamukha, by Sangharaja Vajirananavarorasa, points out the fallacy in this idea. If in the end only the bhikkhu’s word is accepted, then the “trustworthiness” of the laywoman becomes meaningless. To be trustworthy is more than just not lying—it is to be a reliable source of information. Someone who is trustworthy can, by definition, be trusted to know what it is that they saw and describe it properly. This argument is substantially the same as the position of the Dharmaguptaka Vibhanga. Vajirananavarorasa concludes that “trustworthy” indicates that the authorities should believe in her testimony. He also accepts the implication of this, namely that the testimony of the laywoman can be sufficient even if the bhikkhu denies the charge. He further agrees that by restricting “trustworthy” to only “noble disciples,” the Vibhanga is “defining it on an excessively high level.” He assigns this definition to the “arranger” of the Vibhanga rather than to the Buddha. When an accused abuser is exonerated, he doesn’t take it as a chance to reflect on his conscience and reform his acts. He is being told by the patriarchy that he is invulnerable. [...] When an accused abuser is exonerated, he doesn’t take it as a chance to reflect on his conscience and APPENDIX 192 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE reform his acts. He is being told by the patriarchy that he is invulnerable. His sense of narcissism and entitlement only swell, and his actions grow bolder. We need to get past the idea that it is possible for a “good man” to hold a seat of unassailable spiritual authority; that our patriarch is wise and compassionate and only acts for our good. A good man rejects absolute power and authority because he knows that whatever his intentions may be, any institution that requires obedience and submission inevitably leads to abuse. Patriarchy conditions men to believe they can do whatever they want and get away with it. And it conditions women to believe that they can only survive by colluding with the patriarchy against other women. Men become besotted with power, worshipped and exulted each time they commit a worse depravity, daring themselves to go further and indulge their darkest desires. And all too often, it turns out, what men desire is to hurt women. Men don’t start out that way. They begin life as innocent boys, loving and laughing and full of joy. They do not become abusers by chance, but by choice—choices that are shaped and encouraged by patriarchal culture. When they should be stopped, they are excused. The method of patriarchy is to strip women of voice and agency; the purpose is to allow men to act with impunity; the seat of power is real estate; and the endgame is rape. There’s only one way to turn this back: believe women and hold men accountable. The Aniyata rules provide not only an early example of how this can be applied in a monastic context, but also a model for how it can be applied in any community. It is far from a complete and final solution, but it gives us a place to start. When we encounter Buddhist men who deny women’s voices or strip their agency, we know that no matter how revered they may be as teachers or practitioners, they do not speak as the Buddha did; they do not represent the Buddha’s heritage. When men behave badly in a spiritual community, center, or monastery, women often feel beleaguered and alone, that they have no power and everything is stacked against them. They feel that no one believes them—that the sangha, their last refuge from a world of danger, has become the danger. But you should know: the Buddha would have believed you. And for what it’s worth, I believe you too. Suggested Citation: Sujato, Bhante. “The Buddha Would Have Believed You.” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 187-192. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 193 The Factor of Race/Ethnicity in Clergy Sexual Abuse of Children TRACI C. WEST Dr. Traci C. West is Professor of Christian Ethics and African American Studies at Drew University Theological School (Madison, NJ). She is the author of numerous books, articles, and book chapters on sexual, gender, and racial justice, gender-based intimate violence, and clergy ethics. This article was republished with permission by Concilium.1 When clergy sexual abuse occurs there is a violation of the psyche. Victim-survivors of the abuse have their spiritual and emotional identity raided by the perpetrator. The clergy perpetrator may use intimidation, shame, isolation, terror, trust, or scripture, among many other means. These emotional and spiritual dynamics of clergy sexual abuse are not only interpersonal (between the two people involved); they also include social dimensions that help to perpetuate the destructive impact of the abuse in fundamental ways. Dynamics related to gender, race/ethnicity, sexuality, and class infuse the interpersonal interactions involved as well as the long-term effects of clergy sexual abuse for the victim-survivor. These interrelated social dynamics are part of the manipulations of the clergy perpetrator and the responses of the victim-survivor, but exactly how and to what degree each plays a role varies according to the specific situation of the abuse. In addition, the social meanings attached to gender, race/ethnicity, sexuality, and class centrally inform the religious institutional context of the sexual abuse and how its significance is interpreted. In the aftermath of clergy sexual abuse the trauma for the victim-survivor is often reinforced by the community’s response to it (e.g. by their own family members, church leaders, criminal justice system). Therefore, his or her experience of intimidation, shame, isolation, terror, trust or the use of scripture in clergy sexual abuse is always shaped by a combination of emotional, spiritual, as well as social dynamics. Highlighting understandings of gender and race/ethnicity in US society, I want to focus on this intertwined psychosocial impact. My inquiries concerning race/ethnicity and racism refer mainly to African American examples, and my discussion of gender concentrates on the traumatic experience of abuse perpetrated by males. How do these psychosocial dynamics in clergy sexual abuse of children and women constitute moral harm? When the interests and needs of victim-survivors are our primary concern, what factors must be included to address the perpetuation of this moral harm in our society? 1 Traci C. West, “The Factor of Race/Ethnicity in Clergy Sexual Abuse of Children,” Concilium 2004/3: (June 2004): 40-50. APPENDIX