Chapter 1 The Problem with Boundaries Too often when boundary problems are discussed, worst-case examples come to mind. And the worst-case examples invariably involve sexual misconduct: a minister becomes sexually involved with a parishioner who comes for counseling, a youth director becomes too involved in the lives of teenagers, a minister is found to have pornography on the church’s computer. While these are examples of boundary problems that are sadly too frequent, they are in some ways unhelpful examples. Because so much time and energy goes into dealing with these notorious examples, everyday boundary problems among clergy are rarely talked about. The reality is that setting and maintaining clear boundaries for clergy is often complicated by long-term neglect of personal and professional needs and limits, as the following two examples demonstrate. Robert, a tall, well-dressed senior minister from a tall-steeple church, slumped dejectedly into a chair in my office. Despite his professional appearance, his affect was flat, and he seemed to have little energy. He announced in a rather lifeless voice that he was burned out and then smiled and said, “I’m not sure I even know what that means.” While he enjoyed a successful long-term tenure in a progressive congregation, he described his ministry as lifeless and flat and stated that he was simply going through the motions at this point. He reported being distracted, bored, and agitated. The energy and idealism from earlier in his ministry that allowed him to work long hours had faded. He reported dread of board meetings and even disliked the sound of his own voice when preaching. He acknowledged that he no longer keeps up with serious reading, watches too much TV, and admitted with some embarrassment that he looks forward to getting home, watching mindless TV, and drinking wine—and revealed that he is drinking more wine than ever. He noted that he is not sure how he is going to make it to retirement. He stated that spiritually he feels empty and often feels like a fraud while preaching. For years, Robert has worked sixty- and seventy-hour weeks, has taken little time off, and has added significant responsibility in his judicatory. Robert has ignored boundaries and self-care for decades. He has never taken time for himself and his own spiritual life. He has found it difficult to say “no” on too many occasions, resulting in being chronically overcommitted and having difficulty even knowing what he needs. What he didn’t realize was the absence of healthy boundaries in his work life and his inability to say “no” resulted in burnout and even depression. Sandra, on the other hand, is a younger version of Robert. Sandra had been called to the congregation she was serving because the search committee was looking for an energetic younger minister to revitalize their congregation and help them return to the glory years when the Sunday school was booming and the pews were full. Despite major changes in the community, an aging congregation, and the downsizing of several key employers in town, the expectation was that Sandra could create growth. And in her idealism, she agreed to take on the assignment. She worked tirelessly, launched new programs, and experimented with new worship forms, only to face increased criticism from the older members of the congregation. The congregation, unprepared for the very changes they stated they desired, became increasingly anxious, and so did she. Sandra wanted desperately to succeed. At the same time, she was running on empty. In addition to her work, Sandra was married and had a young child. Whether at home or at work, someone always wanted something from Sandra. Fighting fatigue, she stopped exercising and praying and gave in to eating fast food on the run. With no time to think through requests and respond thoughtfully, a cycle of reactivity began spiraling out of control. Instead of being free to choose her response, Sandra began to internalize requests as non-negotiable demands. As requests were made, Sandra reacted—often with an undertone of anger. The congregation or her family members criticized her response, and Sandra became increasingly defensive and aggressive in tone, which only served to increase the complaints. Sandra, while defensive and anxious, knew problems were brewing. What she did not realize was that her depletion, anxiety, and desperate need for validation had provided fertile ground for a culture of criticism and complaint. At the beginning of psychotherapy, she had no idea how much she longed for validation and how hard she would work to get it, rather than stepping back and setting limits on much-needed time for reflection and self-care. Both Robert and Sandra are dealing with significant problems that result from lack of clear boundaries. While their stories are different, both are struggling because of their inability to understand and establish clear boundaries in their respective ministries and to find authentic sources of personal and professional replenishment. What Are Boundaries? Too often boundaries are viewed as negative restrictions, rather than limits that promote and contribute to health (we use the terms “boundaries” and “limits” interchangeably). In one of the first stories in the Bible, God sets a “boundary” in the Garden of Eden. God offers freedom to live our lives within the context of a limit. The story does not end well. As Adam and Eve cross the boundary, innocence and freedom are disrupted, and we see in the story the beginning of shame, guilt, and alienation. Could this be a paradigmatic story for ministry? Is it possible that freedom is always lost when boundaries are violated and that setting and maintaining healthy boundaries unleashes new energy for pastoral excellence? Paradoxically, limits are necessary for human growth and flourishing. For example, healthy marriages set certain boundaries around the relationship, for without the safety of healthy boundaries, intimacy cannot flourish. Marital boundaries, or vows, are intended to increase intimacy and love. When they are crossed, intense pain, betrayal, and alienation result. Healthy families also understand that boundaries are essential for effective child development. Research suggests that healthy parents set limits that are not too rigid or too loose but are aimed at being developmentally appropriate so children are free to be children, are safe, and do not have to take care of their parents. Unhealthy families, such as families organized around alcoholism, often do not maintain effective boundaries. Children raised in families without limits grow up feeling excessively burdened. As the result of addiction, often one or more of the children are “parentified” and have to take on the role of caregiver, feeling over-responsible for almost everything. The absence of healthy boundaries often saddles those who grow up in alcoholic families with lifelong anxiety. As adults, these individuals recall feeling pressured to keep their parents sober, make sure there was enough money, and provide meals and protection for their younger siblings. To no surprise, they also report feeling hyper-vigilant, over-responsible, and unable to relax. These are the unfortunate results of growing up without healthy boundaries. While boundaries are essential for producing family health—and much of couple and family therapy focuses on creating a clear structure and boundaries for the well-being of the couple and family—they are also essential for physical health. Physicians prescribe health boundaries to help their patients move toward wellness. Most of us have heard the basic medical advice: watch what you eat, exercise, do not smoke, and so forth. None of this advice is meant to be negative, just as parents do not set clear boundaries to ruin their kids’ fun. Good boundaries aim at producing health. On the simplest level, boundaries define the separation between self and other. A person with a healthy sense of self knows what he or she wants and needs and is able to say “no” to what is not helpful and request more of what he or she needs. As we’ve noted above, without clear personal boundaries, healthy relationships are very difficult. Physical boundaries define how close someone can become, who can touch us, and how that person can touch us. Emotional boundaries are more complicated. Discerning our emotions and how they are separate from the feelings of those around us is not always clear. Sometimes we take responsibility for what another feels and then try to give her what she needs without even stopping to reflect on what we might need. Saying “no” in the territory of emotional needs can be difficult, especially if we have a need to please people, rescue them, or be the hero. We may default to automatic roles, without considering our boundaries. While boundaries can be too permeable, they can also be too rigid. The most obvious example of boundaries that are too permeable is clergy sexual abuse, but others are more ordinary and problematic. As Margaret Marcuson points out in her book Leaders Who Last: Sustaining Yourself and Your Ministry, avoiding conflict by never taking a stand or limiting your social life to your parishioners so that you are too close to take a stand are also problematic, too-permeable boundaries. But being too rigid is also problematic. Some clergy set limits and boundaries in such a way that people feel alienated and pushed away. Marcuson points out the problem of distancing by avoiding others or becoming distracted so that our relationships are not substantive enough to allow us to lead. Clergy who distance or hold too-rigid boundaries forget that healthy boundaries are meant to allow healthy intimacy. Boundaries that are too inflexible block people from connecting and getting close. Robert Frost is famous for the line “good fences make good neighbors,” a way of talking about the value of boundaries. [1] But in another less-well-known poem, “There Are Roughly Zones,” Frost talks about the problems caused by our human tendency to overreach our boundaries. The context for the poem is a bitterly cold night in northern New England. We overhear a conversation about a peach tree—and how it was “very far north” to plant a tree that can’t withstand such cold. “If it never again has leaves, / We’ll know, we say, that this was the night it died.” [2] Drawing on this metaphor of a peach tree on a cold winter’s night, Frost asks why humans seem incapable of staying within discrete limits or boundaries. He asks why it is so hard for humans to learn that even though there isn’t a “fixed line between wrong and right,” “there are roughly zones whose laws must be obeyed?” In the same way that a peach tree planted outside its hardiness zone will die on a cold winter night, humans without boundaries can also perish. Boundaries are the “laws” protecting those “rough zones” that, when ignored, contribute to and result from an ongoing cycle of burnout and lack of limits and, in the worst case, clergy sexual misconduct. But when we learn to live within limits, boundaries lead to life and flourishing ministries. Clergy Sexual Misconduct The most egregious and most studied result of poor boundaries is in the area of clergy sexual misconduct (CSM). While CSM is not the focus of this book—and indeed, our perspective is that focusing on CSM in boundary training obscures the ordinary boundary dilemmas facing most clergy—nevertheless, a brief review of CSM research underscores the need for attention to boundaries. Most of the studies regarding the prevalence of clergy sexual misconduct have been self-report surveys that have found incidents of misconduct occurring in as few as 1 percent and as many as 15 percent of various clergy samples. [3] The most thorough research to date has been conducted by Duke University professor of sociology Mark Chaves and Dean Diana Garland of Baylor School of Social Work (2009). [4] They added a subset of questions about clergy sexual misconduct to the 2008 General Social Survey (GSS), a representative national random survey. So instead of employing the traditional method of surveying clergy about their behavior, Chaves and Garland turned to the survivor-victims of misconduct. In particular, they asked the survey participants whether, since they had turned eighteen years of age, they had experienced “sexual advances or propositions” from a religious leader who was not a spouse or significant other. Their findings indicated that of those surveyed: More than 3 percent of women who had attended a congregation in the past month reported that they had been the object of CSM [clergy sexual misconduct] at some time in their adult lives; 92 percent of these sexual advances had been made in secret, not in open dating relationships; and 67 percent of the offenders were married to someone else at the time of the advance. In the average American congregation of four hundred persons, with women representing, on average, 60 percent of the congregation, there are, on [sic] average of seven women who have experienced clergy sexual misconduct. Of the entire sample, 8 percent report having known about CSM occurring in a congregation they have attended. Therefore, in the average American congregation of four hundred persons, there are, on average, thirty-two persons who have experienced CSM in their community of faith. [5] Two other research findings emphasize the breadth of the problem of clergy sexual misconduct. First, research by Garland and Christen Argueta, a Baylor University research associate, found that clergy sexual misconduct occurs in many denominations and religious faiths. They conducted a qualitative study of forty-six persons who as adults experienced a sexual advance by a religious leader. In their study, seventeen different Christian and Jewish affiliations were represented among congregations experiencing CSM. [6] Second, in the GSS survey mentioned above, an additional disturbing finding was that African American women were more likely than Caucasian women to have experienced clergy sexual misconduct. When asked whether they knew of friends or family members who experienced a sexual advance by a religious leader in their congregation, 8.5 percent of African Americans and 3.7 percent of Caucasians answered affirmatively. [7] Taken together, these studies show us that the problem of clergy sexual misconduct is not limited to any denomination or racial group, and that while the media may focus on Roman Catholic priests abusing young boys, the reality is that too many women—and African American women in particular—are survivor-victims. While the literature reports instances of female offenders, in the GSS study all of the offenders were male, and 96 percent of the offended were female. [8] We can extrapolate from this data to hypothesize that men and women may have different issues regarding boundaries and that training needs to target the needs of men and women differentially, as we will discuss in chapter 5. With the ever-increasing cost of clergy-sexual-abuse litigation, denominations have instituted policies identifying sexual relations between adult congregants and clergy as misconduct subject to discipline. [9] In July 2010, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) approved an amendment to require all governing bodies in the denomination to have a sexual-misconduct policy. Other judicatories have begun to require clergy to attend boundary workshops. For example, in the experience of the authors, the Vermont Conference of the United Church of Christ requires periodic updating of boundary training for all active clergy, and we have been invited to conduct mandatory boundary training for Presbyterian, United Church of Christ, United Methodist, and other denominational groups, as well as Catholic Charities. Clergy Burnout While clergy-sexual-misconduct statistics are sobering, they tell only part of the story. Another significant problem is clergy burnout. How are they related? Poor boundaries certainly are a primary factor contributing to burnout, and burnout makes us less careful about maintaining healthy boundaries. Many times, poor boundaries and burnout go together. The statistics for burnout among clergy are as alarming as the statistics for CSM. Much of the research on clergy burnout relies on the work of Christina Maslach, one of the pioneering researchers on job burnout. Maslach defines burnout as the presence of at least three symptoms: emotional exhaustion, depersonalization (treating others as objects), and feelings of a lack of personal accomplishment at work. [10] A 2007 study of United Methodist clergy in the New York Annual Conference found that 19 percent reported high emotional exhaustion, 10 percent high depersonalization, and 11 percent low personal accomplishment, echoing the results of a 2004 study of a cohort of Anglican priests. [11] A 2004 study of Roman Catholic priests found that 36 percent felt “used up” at the end of the day, 20 percent felt frustrated, 19 percent felt “emotionally drained,” and 14 percent identified themselves as burned out. [12] Peter Steinke, well known for his work with clergy and congregations, describes the high level of stress and burnout among clergy in response to significant anxiety in congregational life. [13] We believe that most clergy are well intentioned, and despite sobering statistics, most are not predators. More often, sexual misconduct and burnout are the painful consequences of the absence of boundaries all along the journey of ministry, and the lack of boundaries contributes to CSM and burnout. Most clergy do not start out burned out or engaging in sexual misconduct, but burnout and CSM become the result of long-standing, unattended needs to be liked and validated and the difficulty clergy experience in saying “no” in multiple environments. While sexual misconduct is a very serious problem, too often other foundational problems—such as the factors leading to professional burnout—are overlooked along the way when boundaries are framed as only pertaining to sexual relationships between clergy and laity. What Causes Boundary Problems? Too often in the literature on burnout and boundary problems, writers locate the problem in either the minister or the system, as if burnout and neglected boundaries were an “either/or” proposition. In the following two sections, we’ll sample some writers who talk only about intrapersonal causes (those within the clergyperson) and others who discuss only systemic causes (those external to the clergyperson). In the third section, we will discuss our belief that both intrapersonal and systemic factors interact, which is why boundary problems can be so intractable. Intrapersonal Factors One body of literature suggests the problem of boundaries lies in the self of the minister and describes some clergy as predators or perfectionists who have a need for control or to be liked. Ironically, the earliest research on burnout suggested the overly dedicated and excessively committed individual is most prone to burnout, theorizing that these persons tend to overextend themselves as a result of their high expectations and idealism. [14] While this proved true in early research on job burnout in various not-for-profit organizations, it is certainly applicable to clergy, who bring to their call a great sense of idealization and commitment. The ways in which an individual views stress and attempts to reduce it are important factors in the development of burnout. William James anticipated this in his lectures in 1901 and 1902 when he talked about “healthy-mindedness,” which he saw as the ability to view things in a basically optimistic way. [15] A study of parish-based clergy found that strategies such as acceptance, active coping, planning, and positive reframing were protective factors against burnout. [16] Yet it is not clear why some people are able to stay positive and others become overwhelmed by stress. Part of the answer of why some clergy are more resilient in the face of stress may be in a connection between developmental factors and the ability to process stress. If significant life events have worn down their reserve, they find themselves less able to process stress creatively, leading to burnout. Some have proposed that the life stage of the clergyperson impacts his or her capacity to tolerate stress and work effectively. For example, in midlife, he or she may be reexamining life’s meaning, attending to a growing dissatisfaction with his or her marriage or roles as a partner, and even struggling to remain generative. With self-awareness and reflection, these midlife issues could lead clergy into conscious and thoughtful choices about their vocation and their relationships and lead to a renewed sense of meaning and purpose. But without self- examination, midlife issues and the associated anxiety to keep them from consciousness can cause clergy to act out in ways that result in poor boundary decisions, even CSM. Not surprisingly, many misconduct issues occur at midlife. One study found that pastors who became involved in extramarital sexual affairs were on average in their early forties. [17] Systemic Factors While these intrapersonal theories all have some merit, a second body of literature argues that boundary problems—and the resulting burnout—are the fault of anxious systems. While many clergy like to think they are autonomous and even “differentiated,” the reality is we are all embedded in networks of relationships that define and sustain us. Christina Maslach illustrates the perspective that systemic factors trump the multitude of potential intrapersonal factors. She comments, “I am forced by the weight of my research to conclude that the problem [of burnout] is best understood in terms of the social situational sources of job related stress. The prevalence of the phenomenon and the range of seemingly desperate professionals who are affected by it suggest that the search for causes is better directed away from the unending cycle of identifying the ‘bad people’ and towards uncovering the operational and structural characteristics in the ‘bad’ situations where many good people function.” [18] No matter how stress hardy we are, how well we apply healthy coping strategies so that we can avoid burnout, there’s something we can’t control: the stress resulting from our vocational settings. So in addition to attending to intrapersonal factors, we also must attend to the complexity of the systems in which we are embedded, the chronic anxiety that is part of some systems, as well as the power of certain systems to create anxiety and burnout. Many writers describe chronic anxiety in congregations. Certainly the decline occurring in the majority of mainline congregations—and the reality that no one knows what to do about it—results in high anxiety about the future. Holding clear boundaries and practicing self-care in a healthy congregation is hard work, but to do so in a congregational system that is chronically anxious about its future, is experiencing and worried about declining finances, and wants to bring back the glory years of the last generation is an even greater challenge. Setting boundaries as anxiety ratchets up in a congregation becomes increasingly difficult. In this regard, issues of the system become a large contributing factor in boundary problems. Clergy entering declining congregations are usually not prepared for the level of chronic anxiety and the expectations for their performance that the congregation’s anxiety brings. Systemic anxiety will be explored in much greater detail in chapter 3. The Interaction of Intrapersonal and Systemic Factors Our position is that both intrapersonal and systemic theories help explain boundary problems but do not go far enough independently to fully explain the depth of the problem. We believe that boundary problems occur when issues within the self of the clergy intersect with anxious church systems, creating an additional interaction effect. The following story shows how the combination of intrapersonal and systemic factors makes a difficult situation worse. The Rev. Martha was called to a small-town parish that could afford only a part-time salary. This arrangement met Martha’s desires to spend time with her family. However, her largely unconscious need to be appreciated (which she was not receiving at home) meant that she looked to her congregation for appreciation, and she paid only lip service to saying “no”—working more than full time, providing pastoral care, planning worship, meeting with youth groups, leading adult education, and serving as pastor for the town beyond the congregation. She worked night and day in order to avoid anyone criticizing her. Despite her best efforts, the church’s membership was primarily comprised of elders with few youth, children, or their young parents attending. More and more young families were too busy for church—or attended the nondenominational church in a neighboring town. Parishioners feared losing a way of life—socially, vocationally, and spiritually. When the church building needed major repairs, anxiety erupted in a conflict at a board meeting where Martha felt criticized and blindsided—and thus lashed out at the congregation for whom she was sacrificing so much. If the parishioners had not been anxious about the feared decline and loss of their congregation, they might have been more appreciative of Martha’s efforts. But their anxiety meant that they projected their fears on a close target—someone who, like themselves, was working hard to stay even but was not in control of the outcome. Had Martha had better boundaries—and been more aware of the need to work on her home life so she felt more nurtured personally—she might have been able to be more objective about the conflict and less reactive. This example illustrates how both parties—pastor and congregation—can turn up the volume, contributing to the increasing anxiety on both sides, rather than helping contain and defuse conflict. Setting boundaries in such a reactive, conflicting, and anxious system was nearly impossible for Martha. Our goal throughout this book is to show the power of the complex interaction of the intrapersonal factors within clergy and the systemic factors in which clergy are embedded. When unresolved or unconscious issues within clergy intersect with the demands of an anxious congregation, boundary problems are bound to result. For example, what happens to a minister who has a need to be liked, and has high idealism, when serving in a chronically anxious declining system with enormous pastoral expectations? Setting healthy boundaries is anything but easy. Boundary-Awareness Training As a result of too many stories like those of the clergy described above, in addition to the statistics about clergy sexual misconduct, most denominations have become alarmed about the difficulty clergy have setting and maintaining boundaries and have initiated workshops and training in “boundary awareness.” Historically, boundary-awareness workshops for clergy have been focused quite narrowly. The original motivation driving boundary training was significant sexual misconduct among male clergy and the long-standing tendency of judicatories to both cover it up and relocate clergy to other congregations. Between the significant scandals involving pedophile priests and significant cover-ups of these crimes, as well as mounting evidence of sexual misconduct among clergy in mainline denominations, voices in the church, often representing the many survivor-victims, cried out for change. Mandatory boundary-awareness workshops became a way of dealing with a staggering problem. What really provided the impetus for boundary-awareness training? Certainly some preventive educational efforts were initiated because of growing denominational awareness and concern. A different view was suggested in a journal article by Timothy Lytton, a professor at Albany Law School. [19] Lytton claims that were it not for litigation, the church would never have cleaned up its act. He asserts that the growing problem of misconduct, along with a lack of effective response from church hierarchies, led victim-survivors to pursue justice in the courts. For too long, the response of both the Catholic Church and mainline Protestant denominations was to cover up abuse or to relocate acting-out clergy. Lytton argues convincingly that judicatory denial would have continued were it not for litigation. Or maybe the real motivation for boundary training was financial. The Associated Press reported in 2009 that the U.S. Catholic Church alone had paid out more than $2.6 billion since 1950 because of clergy misconduct. [20] Because the church coffers could not survive further clergy sexual abuse lawsuits, a preventive educational effort was suggested by their malpractice carriers as a way to mitigate liability. Marie Fortune, with her book Is Nothing Sacred?, was one of the first to write about the need to deal openly with the problem of clergy sexual misconduct, rather than covering it up or relocating acting-out clergy. Following the lead of secular organizations that had already initiated significant steps by setting up sexual-harassment policies and procedures, Fortune pushed the church to catch up to the rest of the professional world. Even more successful was her initiative in changing the understanding of clergy boundary violations. Usually described as “affairs,” Fortune shifted the language, describing clergy who were sexually involved with members of their congregations as guilty of sexual misconduct. She provoked a necessary and significant change in terminology, as well as a change in the conceptual framework for professional relationships, a change sadly still in process among some congregations and denominations. Fortune was a major force in transforming the church’s paradigm for conceptualizing boundary violations. She argued that clergy misconduct should be seen in the same way as it is in other professions, such as social work and psychology, and that its occurrence should result in significant professional censure and discipline. She likened misconduct to incest, since both take place in what should be a safe place and are committed by trusted persons. In 1977, Fortune founded the Faith Trust Institute to more effectively train clergy to prevent CSM. Her writings and work with the institute led to a workshop and associated workbook that framed the problem of clergy boundary violations as sexual misconduct. Her training was adopted as mandatory for clergy of many judicatories. Fortune’s contributions opened up a problem too often buried by the church and started a dialogue about boundary awareness. The statistics about clergy sexual misconduct provide more than ample support for Fortune’s version of boundary training. While the need for sexual-boundary training is obvious, sexual boundaries are not the most common, or even the most complicated, boundary problems that clergy must deal with day in and day out, at work and at home. Training based on CSM as the paradigm for boundary violations fails clergy and the wider church, ignoring the ordinary situations in which most clergy struggle to set limits so they might engage more fully in the call that brought them to ministry. By neglecting deeper intrapersonal and systemic factors, boundary training can lead us into complacency about clergy and congregational health, as well as to miss an opportunity to enhance clergy and congregational effectiveness and vitality. For example, consider the multiple roles that clergy are asked to assume within a congregation. Most professions have clearly defined roles and expertise. This in turn gives them authority in their particular context. We expect our CPA to know tax law and give us clear advice and guidance as we fill out our tax forms. We expect our physicians to accurately diagnose and appropriately treat an illness that we report. However, we do not ask our CPA for advice about our health, raising our children, or marriage. Nor do we ask our physician for help preparing our taxes. They each function within a clearly defined scope of practice. In fact, most states have regulatory boards that define the scope of practice for each of the licensed professions, delineating what they have been trained to do and how to file a complaint if they function outside of their scope of practice. Compare these circumscribed roles of most professions to the roles of many clergy. Clergy are often expected to be generalists with expertise in everything from family and marital problems, to finance, to administration, to preaching, teaching, pastoral care, and spiritual direction—and even occasional janitorial and landscaping duties. In addition, clergy meet with parishioners in a variety of contexts that make boundaries more complicated. Over time, clergy get to know a lot about their parishioners and have to interact with them in multiple contexts. A minister might have an emergency counseling session with a family in crisis, one of whose members is the chair of the finance committee, and then meet up with them again over a church dinner. Not surprisingly then, the contexts in which clergy function are extremely complicated and fluid. In addition, much of boundary training has failed to recognize that there is a systemic component to boundary problems. In short, clergy are asked to set boundaries in congregational and denominational systems that resist (and resent) boundaries. Too often, congregations are highly anxious, as we will explore in chapter 3, and have demanding expectations for their clergy. Many believe their minister should be on call 24/7. In such congregations, clergy who set boundaries are overriding congregational norms and desires. With the pressure of internal needs for approval and validation, the system pressures to be on duty 24/7, and the way anxiety on both sides of the equation increases an interaction effect, clergy face difficult odds in setting boundaries, too often saying “yes” to everything. This is especially true in small parishes, where clergy must be generalists and have skills in a wide variety of pastoral tasks, ranging from preaching to pastoral care to administration to making sure the heat is on and the bulletins are printed accurately. Many clergy report they have far too many bosses, all of whom expect something different, and feel pressured to say “yes” to everything. However, when clergy say “yes” to everything, and have trouble saying “no,” mediocrity is the result, and the church suffers. What is often missing in boundary-awareness training is a framework that acknowledges that sexual boundaries, while of course important, are not the only critical boundaries. Rather, general personal and professional boundaries are essential to any successful, thriving ministry. Without the ability to say “no” and set clear limits in ministry, clergy cannot say “yes” to all that contributes to pastoral excellence. In this sense, we believe that boundaries are the key not only to the prevention of both sexual misconduct and burnout but also to the revitalization of the church. Boundary-awareness training therefore needs to be significantly expanded to focus on boundaries in general if it is to contribute to the revitalization of the church. While boundary trainings and literature have focused a lot of attention on clergy sexual misconduct, little has been said about the day-to-day problems of setting boundaries in ministry. By focusing on setting limits in anxious systems, we hope to help clergy say “no” to what depletes their health and the health of their congregations in order to say “yes” to the attitudes, knowledge, and skills that promote pastoral excellence and contribute to the overall health of the pastor, the pastor’s family, and the congregation. Practice Recall the last time you said “yes” to a request, spoken or implied, from a member of your congregation and you wanted to say “no.” What was the request? What was the context of the request? On a scale of one to ten (ten being high), how much did you regret saying “yes”? How did you feel at the time? Later in the day or week? After you fulfilled the request? What did you say to yourself about the reasons for your choice? How did this storyline impact your feelings about the request? Were you aware of a reaction in your body to the situation? If so, what was it? What did the reaction suggest to you about your feelings about the request? What kinds of compensatory behaviors or “escapism” did you engage in, and what did these behaviors suggest about your feelings and needs? What do you imagine would have happened if you said “no” instead of “yes”? What repercussions might have emerged in the congregational system? How would you handle those reactions? If you had said “no,” how do you think you would have felt? If you had said “no,” what different “yes” do you think might have been free to emerge? Describe how that different scenario feels. 1. Robert Frost, “Mending Wall,” The Poetry of Robert Frost, ed. Edward Connery Lathem (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969), 33. 2. Ibid., 305. 3. Diana R. Garland and Christen Argueta, “How Clergy Sexual Misconduct Happens: A Qualitative Study of First-Hand Accounts,” Social Work and Christianity, 37, no. 1 (2010): 1–27. 4. Mark Chaves and Diana Garland, “The Prevalence of Clergy Sexual Advances toward Adults in Their Congregations,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 48, no. 4 (2009): 817–24. 5. Diana R. Garland, “The Prevalence of Clergy Sexual Misconduct with Adults: A Research Study Executive Summary,” Baylor University, accessed September 23, 2013, www.baylor.edu/clergysexualmisconduct. 6. Garland and Argueta, “How Clergy Sexual Misconduct Happens,” 1–27. 7. Chaves and Garland, “The Prevalence of Clergy Sexual Advances,” 821. 8. Ibid., 820. 9. Garland and Argueta, “How Clergy Sexual Misconduct Happens,” 2. 10. S. P. Daniel and M. Rogers, “Burn-out and the Pastorate: A Critical Review with Implications for Pastors,” Journal of Psychology and Theology 9, no. 3 (1981): 232–49. 11. Benjamin R. Doolittle, “Burnout and Coping among Parish-Based Clergy,” Mental Health, Religion and Culture 10, no. 1 (January 2007): 31–38. 12. Perry C. Francis and Tracy D. Baldo, “Narcissistic Measures of Lutheran Clergy Who Self-Reported Committing Sexual Misconduct,” Pastoral Psychology 47, no. 2 (1998): 81–96. 13. Peter L. Steinke, Congregational Leadership in Anxious Times: Being Calm and Courageous No Matter What (Herndon, VA: Alban, 2006). 14. Herbert J. Freudenberger, “Staff Burnout,” Journal of Social Issues, 30, no. 1 (1974): 159–65. 15. William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Doubleday, 1902). 16. Doolittle, “Burnout and Coping among Parish-Based Clergy,” 36. 17. S. Butler and S. Zelen, “Sexual Intimacies between Psychotherapists and Their Patients,” Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice (1977): 139, 143–44. Quoted in J. Thoburn and R. Baker, Clergy Sexual Misconduct: A Systems Approach to Prevention, Intervention, and Oversight (Carefree, AZ: Gentle Path Press, 2011), 10. 18. Daniel and Rogers, “Burn-out and the Pastorate,” 233. 19. Timothy Lytton, “Clergy Sexual Abuse Litigation: The Policymaking Role of Tort Law,” Connecticut Law Review, 39 no. 3 (2007): 809. 20. Garland and Argueta, “How Clergy Sexual Misconduct Happens,” 1.