Chapter Appendix 2 Tips for How to Organize a Clergy Group Decide if you want to invite participants from one denomination or from multiple denominations. There are pros and cons both ways. Most participants rate the group with multiple denominations as a richer learning environment. Consider the benefits and liabilities of mixing clergy at different points in their careers. An argument can be made either way, but we suggest being intentional about your choice. To focus on midcareer clergy, for example, may mean the participants can go deeper into the satisfactions and dissatisfactions of being in ministry over the long haul. Entering clergy have different concerns and struggles with boundaries. If you organize a mixed group, appeal to the ways in which the group members can learn from one another. Use the “practice” questions at the end of each chapter to structure the group. Nothing kills a clergy group faster than it devolving into a complaint session. A trained facilitator can help keep the group on track and challenge and support members as needed. Most local pastoral counseling centers will have staff members available to lead clergy groups, and often denominational leaders will also have a list of people available to facilitate these groups. Consider ways in which group members can be accountable to and with one another for their individual and group learning experience—for example, by writing group and individual covenants. More information about leading clergy groups can be found in these resources: So Much Better: How Thousands of Pastors Help Each Other Thrive and Know Your Story and Lead with It: The Power of Narrative in Clergy Leadership. Parker Palmer’s guide to creating circles of trust, while not directly about clergy groups, provides very useful ideas for structuring a group. [1] 1. Richard L. Hester and Kelli Walker-Jones, Know Your Story and Lead with It: The Power of Narrative in Clergy Leadership (Herndon, VA: Alban Institute, 2009); Parker J. Palmer, A Hidden Wholeness: The Journey toward an Undivided Life (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2004).