Chapter 4 When the Self and System Collide As we observed in chapter 1, too often books and workshops on boundaries or burnout focus either on the self of the minister or on the complexities of navigating the congregational system. Our premise is that boundary and burnout problems result from interactions between the minister and the congregational system. In this interactional approach, we focus not simply on the individual issues of the minister or the anxiety-driven issues within the congregation but rather on how the minister defines himself or herself within the congregational system and how the system responds. These two variables function in a reciprocal relationship and can form a complicated feedback loop. Ministers who are not as dependent on validation from congregants, and who are better at both containing their own anxiety and relating to key people, are more likely to successfully set appropriate boundaries. And the more enlightened and understanding the congregation, the greater the odds of those boundaries resulting in healthy and creative ministry since boundaries create room without distraction to focus on mission. While these two approaches—focusing on the clergy’s self or on the congregational system—may seem like different paradigms, in reality they work well together. Self psychology views internal experience through the subjective lens of the self, while Bowenian approaches view the self through a systemic lens. Rather than being contradictory, these two approaches are simply different lenses through which to view the problems clergy encounter. Used together, they help us understand how the intrapsychic and subjective experience of clergy interact with the complex systems in the congregations they serve. Pastor Steve provided a painful example of the interaction effect between his intrapsychic needs, unresolved systemic issues from his family of origin, and systemic issues in the congregation he served. Pastor Steve grew up in a difficult alcoholic family. He was the oldest of four children and provided his mother’s greatest support in dealing with his alcoholic father, who sometimes flew into a rage after drinking. Steve took on the role of the protector and hero in the family. He was the model student and athlete who never got into trouble and was admired by both his teachers and coaches and frequently pointed to as a role model. He tried in vain to keep everything calm at home in the hopes that his father would stop drinking or at least not get violent. He attempted to keep discussions at the dinner table nonconfrontational and tried to help his mother take care of his siblings. Without consciously choosing to do so, he became hyper-vigilant in his attempt to keep things peaceful. He described to his therapist always being on alert and mildly anxious as he attempted to prevent possible catastrophes. He believed that relaxing would increase the possibility that he would miss something, with disastrous consequences. His mother confided all of her anxieties and frustrations about his father to Steve, almost putting him in the position of a pseudo-spouse. Steve played multiple roles in the family: hero, perfect son, peacemaker, and marriage counselor. He received constant mirroring and validation from his mother and teachers for being the perfect child and was seen as more of an adult then a child. He jokingly claimed that he never had a childhood since he was so busy parenting his parents. Unfortunately, much of his self-esteem was based on the praise he received for his role in the family. When Steve went to seminary, his mother and extended family were thrilled, and of course he excelled, becoming a leader among his classmates. He helped out as a student assistant in a large congregation during his final year of seminary and was loved by the congregation. After finishing seminary and getting married, Steve began his first full-time call serving a very difficult congregation. The previous minister had ended his tenure badly, with a number of allegations about questionable ethical practices. Some of the congregation loved the former pastor and believed he was unfairly pushed out, while another faction thought the judicatory should have taken disciplinary actions against him. A powerful split was emerging in the congregation, with some angry with the former minister and others singing his praises. Members of the two factions were not talking to each other, and their positions had become more and more rigid and polarized. The level of anxiety was palpable and manifested in a number of ways, including people stopping their contributions and a number of families dropping out of the church. This was the context of Steve’s ministry. Without realizing it, Pastor Steve had reentered his family of origin. The emotional climate of the congregation was familiar to Steve and replicated much of how he felt growing up. He found himself in his familiar roles of peacemaker, confidant to a number of unhappy congregants, and being recruited into numerous triangles—just as he had been in his family of origin. Because being liked and validated was important to Pastor Steve, he worked tirelessly, attempting to bring people together, listening to their stories, and trying to make peace. Steve was unaware of the toll that these roles had been taking on his health over the years. Once again, he had become hyper-vigilant and anxious about all the possible things that could go wrong. He was extremely aware of the many ways situations in the congregation could fly apart and frequently woke in the middle of the night with tightness in his chest, unable to fall back to sleep due to the level of anxiety he was feeling. Pastor Steve even wound up in the emergency room, afraid that he was having a heart attack. But his symptoms weren’t coronary problems. He was having a panic attack. In addition, his marriage was becoming strained—at least partially due to his inability to say “no.” As Steve worked longer and longer hours, his wife and two young children became more and more resentful. His wife was no longer providing validation for him, and without meaning to, Steve turned more and more to his work to find that appreciation. Without conscious choice, Steve was back in the familiar roles that he learned growing up in his family of origin. While Steve was certainly not guilty of boundary violations that could be seen as professional misconduct, he was violating boundaries every day in his attempt to make peace, bring people together, and help a congregation in decline turn around. He found it almost impossible to say “no” or to set limits. Of course the congregational leaders were at the same time urging him to do more and praising him for his tireless work. Steve was in trouble. His boundaries were not holding, his marriage was strained, and he was exhausted. The unresolved issues as the over-functioning child in the family of an alcoholic, along with his profound need for validation for being a peacemaker and problem solver, now intersected with a troubled, anxiety-driven congregation. Because the interaction effect is powerful, we can assume that without intervention, the situation will end badly. Our premise is that this type of interaction between the issues of individual clergy and their congregation’s dynamics makes setting ministry boundaries difficult. The story of Pastor Steve illustrates how complicated this interaction can be. The fault was not with Steve, and was not with his congregation, but rather with how his preexisting issues interacted with complicated system dynamics in his congregation. The result was a perfect storm. For this reason, setting healthy boundaries is not easy work. The issues that clergy bring to ministry have the potential to become activated by congregational dynamics. Clergy and Multiple Systems In addition to the work of setting boundaries in complicated congregational systems, clergy are part of a number of systems simultaneously. For example, while attempting to lead a congregation, a minister is involved with his or her own immediate family issues, dealing with both marital issues and parenting issues. It is not uncommon for a minister to be attempting to lead a congregation through difficult times, while trying to set boundaries with a teenager, who is in trouble at school and not performing well academically. And while these pressures are going on, ministers may also have aging parents in another state requiring care. Now the minister is caught between the competing demands of at least five systems: the church system, the marital system, the parenting system, and the school system—not to mention aging parents in poor health. All of those systems want something and are putting pressure on the minister. Those pressures, especially in midlife, can be suffocating and can make it very difficult to set boundaries. Consequently, clergy are always engaged in feedback loops with a number of systems at the same time. Clergy and Nuclear Family While clergy are dealing with difficult and anxious congregational systems, we are also dealing with our own marriages and families. This is a powerful feedback loop. Too many clergy spouses feel shortchanged and bitter about their spouse’s failure to set boundaries and have the sense that the congregation functions as the pastor’s lover—whose needs come before those of the spouse and family. Missed soccer games, too many late evening meetings, exhausting Sundays followed by depressed Mondays, emergency visits that take their spouse away from home, and too many phone calls during dinner all take their toll. How many clergy have heard their spouse say, “You have time for everyone but me. Maybe I could make an appointment with you and then you would listen to me.” Clergy are often torn between the needs of their families and the demands of their congregations. They know that in the end neither system is happy. And, to complicate matters even more, pastors are sometimes rewarded for being over-responsible. As a minister over-functions, she may be getting praise for her work in the parish and criticism at home, which, in turn, makes her over-function even more in the parish, in order to attain the internal affirmation she lacks. The Rev. James admits that his marriage is in trouble. The congregation where he ministers is doing well, and he gets accolades for his sixty- and seventy-hour workweeks. He admits he does not like to go home and hear his wife criticize him for not being emotionally available. With some embarrassment, James reported that he provided pastoral counseling to a woman whose own marriage was in trouble and who said to him at the end of their meeting, “I hope your wife knows how lucky she is to be married to you. You are one of the kindest, most supportive men I have ever met.” He then described driving home feeling good about himself, only to hear his wife say as he walked in the door, “Late again! Dinner is now cold, the kids are cranky, and I’m sick of your schedule.” As we discussed in chapter 2, the congregation—or at least people in the congregation—can function as self-objects to the pastor, providing the affirmation clergy lack. When parishioners function as self-objects to the pastor, professional roles and boundaries are reversed, and the pastor loses his capacity to lead the congregation. In this example, the parishioner for whom James is providing pastoral care is also functioning as a self-object for him, helping him feel a greater sense of self-worth. In the crucible of family and congregational interactions, over-functioning for the congregation and receiving the validation and mirroring that results may feel easier than working through a thorny marital issue that requires insight and change. For many clergy, negotiating between family and congregation becomes a complicated boundary problem. They are caught between the demands of family and the demands of congregation. Instead of addressing these competing demands, many clergy turn back to the congregation to receive the support they are not receiving at home. Family of Origin At the same time they are negotiating between the needs of their congregations and current families, clergy have to deal with the legacies of their original families. Our families present us with challenges with both vertical and horizontal dimensions. The horizontal dimension reflects current stressors, such as aging parents, health crises, and difficult siblings. The vertical dimension describes the process by which roles, triangles, and anxiety are passed on from one generation to the next. The horizontal dimension also includes the all-too-frequent role of the clergyperson as the over-responsible member of their family of origin—a role that does not end just because they are adults. Parents and siblings continue to call. For many clergy, midlife is a collision of multiple stressors. When clergy are caught between aging parents in need of care, a developing family with adolescents who might be pushing the boundaries, and a demanding congregation, we can easily become overwhelmed. Sarah’s experience was a perfect example of a horizontal challenge. She was the senior minister in a growing suburban congregation. On the surface, everything looked great. Her ministerial colleagues were envious of the seeming health of her congregation and the many programs she had launched. However, her stress levels were getting out of control. Her two children were adolescents, and her son was testing all the family boundaries. He announced defiantly that he no longer believed in God and would not attend church or youth group. Her husband had just been promoted to a managerial post and was working longer and longer hours. Her aging mother had become increasingly frail, and Sarah knew she would have to make complicated decisions about her future care. Sarah felt constant guilt about not being able to be present or provide the care that her parents, who lived in Florida, needed, and she worried about when she might be able to spend time with them. And while her congregation was doing well, they are now faced with a major task: renovating their educational wing and fellowship hall and trying to raise the money to do so. Where in the world does she begin to set boundaries? To whom can she say “no”? She is feeling pressure from three systems simultaneously. Being a people pleaser, Sarah hates to disappoint anyone. The thought that she cannot manage all the balls in the air and that she is going to have to make painful decisions to set limits is overwhelming. If she sets boundaries in any of these three systems, someone will be unhappy with her, which will stir up one of her core issues: her need to please everyone. Pastor Sarah feels flooded with anxiety when she thinks of disappointing anyone in any of these overlapping systems. The family of origin also has a vertical dimension. Most people are not aware of the legacy of multigenerational anxiety that we inherit. However, this multigenerational legacy is extremely important for understanding leadership styles. The vertical flow impacts how clergy lead during times of anxiety. Will they become reactive, cut off, get involved in triangles? The answer is to some extent influenced by multigenerational patterns that are passed on through vertical transmission. Many clergy can talk about their Myers–Briggs type and may even be able to describe their leadership style. Rarely, however, are we aware that the presence or absence of anxiety leads to two distinctly different leadership styles. While a minister may pride himself or herself on having a calm, nonreactive, vision-oriented leadership style, a different style emerges when anxiety ratchets up. Under intense anxiety, a more primitive style of leadership emerges, frequently connected to our role in our family of origin. The Rev. Stan was a model minister. He kept up with regular continuing education, was respected in his denomination, and for five years had served First Church, a very successful parish that was growing numerically and developing spiritually. However, in his sixth year with the congregation, a controversy emerged about the congregation’s vision for the future and how to utilize their endowment. Anxiety began to increase. Parishioners began to withhold their pledges. As he had in the past, the Rev. Stan tried to lead creatively, focus on process, and stay nonreactive. However, stress mounted in the overlapping relationship systems Stan was part of. Congregational finances became tighter. Stan and his wife began to struggle with their seventeen-year-old son. Stan’s father was diagnosed with cancer. A perfect storm was brewing. The Rev. Stan’s reactive responses increased, and he began to cut off emotionally from his wife and his congregation. As a child, when his family’s anxiety became too toxic, Stan would retreat to his room, turn on his stereo, and tune the world out. He handled difficulty with his family of origin by emotionally shutting down and cutting off. He was now repeating the same strategy with negative consequences. Stan was faced with an interaction effect—trying to cope with a congregational conflict at the same time as family crisis—which together triggered increased anxiety in Stan, his family, and his congregation. Stan’s normal leadership style is no longer working, and his default style has kicked in. Not only is Stan’s wife noticing the difference, but also people in the congregation are noticing. Stan is more withdrawn, looks tired, and is becoming more reactive than has been usual for him over his six years in this parish. However, the story became more complicated. As Stan began to cut off and shut down, he became lonelier and began to look forward to discussions with a female member of his board who was extremely supportive and empathic. While nothing inappropriate had happened, Stan was on a slippery slope that could have devastating consequences. All of us are embedded in numerous systems. Clergy must deal with congregational and family dynamics, not to mention family-of-origin, community and denominational pressures, friendships, and the need to have a personal life. Balancing all of these relationships and needs is a monumental task. Just in the congregation alone, the minister must negotiate numerous feedback loops. She is in relationship with administrative boards, congregational secretaries, choir directors and organists, the women’s group and men’s group, people who want pastoral care, members who require pastoral care, people who wish everything would go back to the good old days.... The list goes on and on. Setting effective boundaries requires the minister to know the legacies of his family of origin—such as the unmet needs for validation and mirroring, as well as the way he was often validated for the role he played in his family of origin. But it also requires the ability to accurately read the congregational system he is part of, assess the congregation’s level of anxiety, and recognize when parishioners are catching the contagion of the anxious system. At the same time, leaders of his congregation can facilitate the minister’s boundary setting by learning to recognize their own levels of anxiety and helping set clear boundaries—protecting his days off, refraining from contacting him at home except in emergencies, encouraging him to use all the time allotted for his vacation and continuing education, and establishing a sabbatical policy and insisting he make use of it. Obviously, most congregational leaders do not think in these progressive ways. We believe that it is important for denominational leaders to provide board training to help educate board members about recognizing anxiety and supporting healthy boundaries for their ministers. Clergy can spell out these expectations and needs, as well as the likely resistance to them, when they enter a new system. And outside facilitators brought in early on can help congregations and boards to consider their role in protecting and nurturing their newly called pastoral leader. The Problem of Emotional Contagion Understanding the family-of-origin issues that clergy bring to ministry as well as how those issues interact with the complicated issues of congregational systems is difficult on a good day. However, the greater the anxiety within the minister and in the congregation, the more difficult this becomes. The power of emotional contagion is a particularly useful concept in helping to understand what happens in times of heightened anxiety. Anxiety is highly contagious. When anxiety increases in a system, it tends to become infectious. Anxiety, like a bad case of the flu, can spread quickly, without people even knowing why they are anxious. In intervening in anxious congregations during times of crisis, I have facilitated listening groups to learn what congregants think the problem is. These listening groups can be used by ministers as a tool to help lower congregational anxiety and create better understanding. They are very simple to structure. People are encouraged to sign up in groups to give their perspective about various church issues. The minister’s role is simply to facilitate the discussion, model healthy communication, and help people listen to each other. The listening process often results in people better understanding each other and in the end feeling less anxious. Listening groups can amaze the leader and participants, as they overhear so many definitions of the problem and notice that most definitions arise from indirect information! An example of just such indirect information is the following: “I heard from Mrs. So and So that our minister did not visit Mr. X when he was sick, because it was our minister’s day off.” These stories spread through anxious systems like the old game of telephone so that in the end the contagion of anxiety has infected almost everyone and the concluding story bears little resemblance to the initial problem or complaint. Listening groups clarify issues of concern as well as help correct misinformation and rumors. Contagion occurs during times of chronic anxiety. As was stated in chapter 3, chronic anxiety is the result of multiple stressors that occur over time. When people are caught in chronically anxious systems, they can lose awareness of their anxiety, since anxiety has now become their norm. The greater the anxiety and emotional contagion, the more primitive and reactive people become and the less capable of creative thinking. Emotional contagion fuels the powerful interactions between the unresolved and often unconscious issues that clergy bring to ministry and the anxiety that is part of many congregations. It fuels the emotional reactivity that often erupts in these contexts, as clergy exhibit poor leadership and congregations project anxiety onto clergy and congregational scapegoats. Our perspective is that clergy must be able to step back and understand the anxiety in their congregations and what congregations do when they are anxious. At the same time, they must become more aware of the issues they bring to ministry and how their leadership style shifts when they are anxious. Finally, they must be able to observe how their issues are intersecting with the issues of the congregation and producing a powerful interaction effect. Without clear boundaries, this work will never take place. Ministers who have put in place time for study and prayer, time to meet with a mentor, coach, or therapist, or time to be part of a clergy group will be in a much better position to better observe themselves and their congregations and shift their leadership style accordingly. The power of emotional contagion and the types of interactions that we have described cannot be underestimated. It is all too easy even for the most creative minister to be drawn into reactive responses. Clear boundaries can make an enormous difference in the health of clergy and congregations. Finding support for setting boundaries is the subject of our final chapter. Practice Create a bar graph showing the level of anxiety in each of your overlapping relational systems. If 0 is no anxiety and 10 is so anxious you are in a state of constant hyper-vigilance, how anxious is your current family? Your congregation? Your family of origin? You? Identify other systems that are significant to you, and add a bar graph for each one. Identify the sources of anxiety in each of these systems. Where do you see interaction effects (that is, where does the anxiety in one system cause anxiety to ratchet up in another system)? What legacies do you carry from your family of origin? For example, what roles did you play? How did you cope when the family was under stress? What needs for validation and admiration were left untended? How are these legacies helpful in your identity as minister? How might they be problematic? What challenges are on the horizon for you on a vertical level (roles, triangles, and anxiety passed down to you from earlier generations) and on the horizontal level (from your role in your family of origin)? What is your leadership style when you are under acute stress? Is your leadership style different when the stress becomes chronic? How do you know when you are becoming reactive during times of anxiety? Where in your body do you feel it?