Chapter 5 Saying No to Say Yes David Brooks, a New York Times columnist and frequent commentator on American politics, government, and culture, wrote a column entitled “The Leadership Revival.” [1] Brooks reminds us of moments of “spine-tingling transcendence” in public life, such as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s mountaintop sermon or Nelson Mandela’s 1964 speech from the dock. The result of such moments, Brooks asserts, is nothing less than epic. These events have inspired many to enter leadership in the public arena. Clergy too have been inspired by similar moments, responding to a call from God to enter ministry. But as Brooks asks: “How do you execute that sort of vision? How do you translate the poetry of high aspiration into the prose of effective governance?” The same question applies to clergy trying to translate “high aspiration” into effective congregational leadership. Like any good homiletician, Brooks offers three suggestions: apprentice to a master craftsman, take a reality bath in a foreign culture in order to gain perspective on your own, and finally, this advice: “Close off your options.” As Brooks notes, “People in public life live in a beckoning world. They have an array of opportunities. They naturally want to keep all their options open. The shrewd strategists tell them to make a series of tepid commitments to see what pans out. Hedge your bets. Play it smart.” But when we hedge our bets, we spread ourselves too thin and dissipate our energy, unable to communicate our initial inspiration. Brooks’s bias is toward focus and narrowing options: to say “no” to some of the innumerable requests filling our days in order to say “yes” to what we truly value. Unless you are willing to close off your options, Brooks instructs, you “never put your full force behind any cause. You make your own trivial career the object of your attention, not the vision that inspired you in the first place. Only the masters of renunciation leave an imprint, only those who can say a hundred Nos for the sake of an overwhelming Yes [our emphasis].” In this chapter, we offer the most compelling reason possible for setting boundaries. Boundaries are essential for the sake of the initial vision that prompted our calls to ministry, that overwhelming Yes. We wrote this book not because we have a fascination with rules but because we have a conviction: ultimately, setting boundaries is about excellence in ministry. By narrowing our options enough that we are able to serve competently and fulsomely, we more fully embody the overwhelming Yes that inspired us to begin with. We begin by looking at the significant goal that inspires setting boundaries: what some call “pastoral excellence.” We’ll explore the practical implications of the theories offered in earlier chapters for setting boundaries. We’ll look at practices that can help us set and maintain appropriate limits over the long haul, such as coaching, therapy, family-of-origin groups, clergy peer learning groups, and spiritual practice. And finally, we’ll consider how congregations can create an environment that respects and fosters clergy boundaries. Practice Tips Recall the moments—perhaps of “spine-tingling transcendence”—that led you to enter the ministry. Write about the vision that still compels you, provides an “overwhelming Yes.” What did you originally hope you would be doing in ministry that would help implement that vision? How does that compare to what you are currently doing? Identify the options you need to “close off” to deepen your commitment to this vision. “Pastoral Excellence” as a New Narrative for Ministry Narrowing our options and setting boundaries enables us to deepen our expertise. As Malcolm Gladwell notes in Outliers, his book about exceptional performance, success in any field is largely a function of practicing a given task a total of around 10,000 times. [2] Gladwell quotes neurologist Daniel Levitin’s book This Is Your Brain on Music: The Science of a Human Obsession: “In study after study... this number comes up again and again. No one has yet found a case in which true world-class expertise was accomplished in less time. It seems that it takes the brain this long to assimilate all that it needs to know to achieve true mastery.” [3] However, we cannot become an expert at anything if we are responding to everything. And we can’t make the choices the gospel requires if we are worried about staying out of conflicts or keeping the peace with the very people who pay our salaries. Something more is required of us if we are to become experts, if we are to have the kind of internal self-cohesion and integrity that enable us to make harrowing choices. What is that something more? For the past decade, one phrase that has captured that “something more” has been “pastoral excellence.” We assert that our capacity to say “no” is directly linked to our potential to develop the expertise and self-cohesion required to become excellent pastors. What do we mean by the term “pastoral excellence?” In 2002, the Lilly Endowment’s Religion Division—under the guidance of Senior Vice President Craig Dykstra and Program Officer John Wimmer—launched a twelve-year, $84 million grant program called Sustaining Pastoral Excellence (SPE). As Dykstra noted in a presentation to a meeting with many of the sixty-three project awardees, [4] the Religion Division’s goal was to strengthen local congregations. A crucial aspect of doing so was to enhance the quality of pastoral ministry—so they decided to focus on “pastoral excellence.” What “pastoral excellence” means was never stipulated by the SPE program and intentionally so, according to Dykstra. “We understand that ‘excellence’ is better described or portrayed than defined or measured. As with ‘beauty,’ we know it when we see it—at least if we have ‘eyes to see.’” A program that reached 10 percent of United States congregations and over forty-eight thousand pastoral leaders, “pastoral excellence” became a term describing “a new narrative of ministry.” In his presentation, Dykstra elaborated some of the contours of pastoral excellence: “If Christian people are truly to hear the Good News and to live faithfully in response, they need pastors who know the Christian gospel in their own heart of hearts, who are well-equipped to teach it and preach it, and who are effectively able to help shape the corporate life and ministry of the congregation into a vital community of faith. Some congregations can survive weak pastoral leadership for a while—but not for long. And we know that really fine pastors are indispensable to the long-term thriving not only of any particular congregation, but also of the large, broad, interconnected community of faith as a whole.” [5] Consultants who helped shape the SPE program were somewhat wary of the term “pastoral excellence.” The word “excellence” is potentially subject to cultural notions that may not conform to theological interpretations of excellence. In a book commissioned by the Lilly Endowment, Greg Jones, then dean and professor of theology at Duke Divinity School, and Kevin Armstrong, senior pastor of North United Methodist Church in Indianapolis, responded to this concern. An uncritical church has adopted cultural notions of excellence, they argue—such as competition, achievement, winners and losers, success—“the essence of personal coaching.” [6] In contrast, the authors reclaim a theological meaning of excellence, such as that found in Philippians 2:6–11 or in Simone Weil’s understanding of the cross as the intersection between creation and Creator, human life and God’s life, tragedy and hope, strength and weakness, death and life. As they write: “Resurrecting excellence does not depend on moral perfection, workaholic behavior, or individual effectiveness. It depends on the intersection of human creativity with divine creativity and on communities of people who join together in a journey of faithfulness to God’s inbreaking kingdom.” [7] Resurrecting excellence clarifies both the distortions and the gifts of three understandings of ordination: calling, profession, and office. At its best, a calling is attentiveness, listening and learning. At its worst, a calling is therapy or self-denial. The gift of a profession is practical wisdom; its distortion is careerism. The office of pastoral leadership at its best is administration and growth in following Jesus; distorted, it leads to authoritarianism, hierarchy, and bureaucracy. In a comprehensive study of pastoral leaders and congregations, also commissioned by Lilly, Jack Carroll, director of the Pulpit and Pew Project at Duke Divinity School, takes a practical look at the underpinnings of pastoral excellence—the demographics, work habits, leadership style, commitment, satisfaction, and health of pastors. [8] He concludes with recommended practices for clergy to take responsibility for growth in pastoral excellence: Develop and practice spiritual disciplines Reflect on your practice of ministry Become lifelong learners Nurture friendships Maintain appropriate boundaries between personal/family life and work Engage in diligent physical and emotional self-care Do not contribute to a culture of complaint or denial Practice Tips What is your definition of pastoral excellence? Reflect on Jack Carroll’s suggested list of ways to nurture pastoral excellence. Where do you long for more depth? What do you need to change—internally, externally—to have room for the “yes” you are longing to practice? If these are the practices that contribute to pastoral excellence, they also provide clues to the boundaries needed in our ministries, in our lives. In which of these practices do we need to go deeper? What’s getting in our way? Are our needs for validation or to be needed proving to be obstacles to deepening our commitment to these practices? One feature of the SPE Program was highlighted as an experiment in strengthening pastors of excellence: peer learning groups. Over sixteen thousand pastoral leaders participated in some form of peer learning groups during the SPE Program. As the SPE website notes, “these groups provide opportunities for intellectual, vocational, spiritual, physical and emotional support, education and encouragement. Pastoral leaders study the Bible and theology, practice spiritual disciplines, build pastoral skills and participate in retreats, much-deserved relaxation and/or renewing travel. In these projects, they are encouraged and enabled to design and implement programs that will help them sustain pastoral excellence over the long haul.” [9] How do peer groups help us solidify pastoral excellence? How do they help us create and maintain the kind of boundaries needed for deepening our practices? Are there groups that are more helpful and groups that are less helpful? Austin Presbyterian Seminary’s College of Pastoral Leaders was funded by Lilly to explore these questions. Janet Maykus, principal of the College of Pastoral Leaders, and Penny Marler, professor of religion at Samford University, conducted the evaluation. Maykus and Marler utilized two national surveys of religious professionals, as well as a survey of several thousand pastors who participated in the SPE peer learning groups. Among their findings are some indicators that describe pastoral excellence. For example, congregations whose pastors participated in peer groups are more likely to cultivate congregations that the researchers describe as “a culture of involvement,” including the following characteristics: Actively assimilate newcomers Rotate lay people in leadership roles more frequently Support youth ministry Participate in community service [10] In addition, the researchers concluded that the longer a pastor participates in a peer group that is led by a trained facilitator and/or has a structured curriculum, the more likely that the pastor’s congregation will be experiencing numerical growth. From our perspective, the most important finding in the research was that clergy peer groups enabled clergy to set and maintain the limits they knew were essential for pastoral excellence. Participants in peer learning groups were better at balancing personal and ministry responsibilities than colleagues who did not participate. Maykus and Marler note that “reports from focus group interviews with our five representative SPE peer groups indicate that belonging to a peer group legitimizes activities that many of pastoral leaders intuitively knew were necessary for a long and vital ministry but found difficult to squeeze into their schedules. Time of Sabbath, fellowship with friends, creative endeavors, prayer, and laughter became parts of their pastoral rhythms and therefore parts of the rhythms of their calls.... When pastoral leaders internalize this rhythm and repeat the pattern,... the benefits, our analysis shows, can be quite tangible.” [11] In comparing pastors who were in peer groups to those who were not, pastors who regularly took a day off were more than two times more likely to be participants in peer groups and to say that maintaining a private life separate from work life was not a problem. Peer groups benefit clergy in many important ways. According to Maykus and Marler: “We can say with a high degree of confidence that if a peer group has certain characteristics [a trained facilitator and a structured curriculum or intentional learning plan], it will: (a) result in a feeling of renewal in a pastoral leader’s ministry; (b) have a positive impact on his or her family and close friends; (c) lead to enhanced creativity; and/or (d) produce greater intimacy with God.” [12] The researchers also identified specific factors that led to a superior peer-group experience, which we will discuss later on in this chapter. Participation in a peer group brings with it the need to resolve conflict. For over the life of the group, conflict will surface—just as in any group. Being able to resolve the conflict positively, participants stated, inspired them to be “bolder and more secure leaders. They also reported that participation in SPE peer groups helped them deal with conflict in their congregations.” [13] We cannot emphasize enough the benefits of these support groups and believe they are an essential part of setting boundaries in the interest of pastoral excellence. Sometimes local pastoral counseling centers sponsor clergy peer groups or may have staff willing and able to do so. Sometimes a group of pastors hire a facilitator from among psychotherapists or mentors they know. Denominations sometimes sponsor peer groups, although many clergy find it helpful to be in a group where multiple denominational perspectives are represented. Appendix 2 offers suggestions on how to start such a group if it is difficult to find one. In summary, Maykus and Marler comment: “It is a healthy balance of relational, spiritual, and instrumental interests and peer group practices, in the end, that yields renewed energy for and commitment to ministry for any pastoral leader.” [14] Practice Tips What kinds of support structures could help you engage more deeply in the ways you practice pastoral excellence? How to Say “No” to Say “Yes”: Boundaries in Action We began this chapter with David Brooks’s references to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Nelson Mandela as examples of highly inspirational leaders who created both moments of transcendence as well as movements that accomplished great things. Certainly both reflect a rare type of excellent spiritual leadership that impacted generations and helped create significant transformation in their countries and in the world. While most have heard their amazing speeches, and felt electrified while listening, it is important to remember that both needed to say “no” to a number of things in their lives in order to say “yes” to a compelling vision of change. Dr. King often predicted an early death for himself as the cost of living out his vision. Nelson Mandela, despite profound injustice and a lengthy prison term, was able to say “no” to bitterness and rage, in order to say “yes” to his vision for South Africa. Much could be said about both leaders’ ability to say “no” for the sake of saying “yes” to their visions. Dietrich Bonhoeffer talks about this in his well-known book The Cost of Discipleship. Excellence in ministry is that ability to say “no” even when it is difficult. And it is the ability to also be very clear about what we are saying “yes” to. This requires high levels of differentiation of self. Self-Differentiation Perhaps one of the ways peer groups help clergy is to hold them accountable in implementing familiar advice. Most of us have attended workshops on self-care and burnout prevention and hear the same recommendations over and over. “Take a sabbatical, get exercise, spend time with family, cultivate friends apart from the congregation, read more, eat a balanced diet, practice spiritual disciplines, go on retreat.” The problem with all of this well-meaning advice is that most clergy already know what they should be doing but find it quite difficult to find the time and energy to do the very things that will make them healthier and might enhance their ministry. Peer groups provide a support network to explore both healthy strategies that will lead to excellence and support for setting the boundaries that will help them get there. Peer groups also help us work on one especially crucial aspect of setting boundaries—understanding and strengthening our level of differentiation, a concept originally developed by Murray Bowen. For clergy to be successful and develop excellence in ministry, they must also move toward improved levels of differentiation. Clergy groups help us be accountable and support and challenge us. Clergy groups may also provide both support and help for differentiation work especially when led by a trained facilitator. Many clergy have also benefited from working with the insights of two students of Murray Bowen, Rabbi Edwin H. Friedman and the Rev. Peter Steinke, [15] and may have even used these books within clergy groups. The Role of Differentiation in Setting Boundaries Differentiation is defined as “the ability to be in emotional contact with others yet still autonomous in one’s emotional functioning.” [16] It is the ability to maintain emotional objectivity in the midst of a system in emotional turmoil but still actively connect to people in the system. From a boundary-awareness perspective, a differentiated minister will have both the strength to set firm and clear limits, while staying emotionally connected to key members of the congregation, even in times of great anxiety. Some clergy find it easy to say “no” but have difficulty maintaining emotional connection to congregants while doing so. Others stay emotionally connected but have great difficulty saying “no” to things that move them away from creativity. Doing both simultaneously is complicated. Setting limits begins with the necessity of being clear about one’s vision of excellence in ministry. Without clarity about what we are saying “yes” to, there is little point in saying “no.” This is especially complicated in small parishes where clergy are expected to be generalists and be good at everything from preaching to pastoral care, to administration, to proofreading the bulletin, and making sure the heating system works in the winter. Bowen’s concept of differentiation provides a map for practice of setting boundaries. Murray Bowen [17] originally described a scale of differentiation ranging from one to one hundred with higher scores representing higher levels of differentiation. People who have a poorly differentiated self are dependent on the acceptance and approval of others and tend to adjust their actions on the basis of others’ approval or expectation. In the same way, an extreme rebel within a family is not differentiated but simply takes an oppositional position in regard to others. Neither the rebel nor the person desperate for approval is differentiated. On the other hand, people who are more differentiated can stay calm in the midst of anxiety and criticism, can separate feelings from thinking so their decisions are not clouded by emotionality, and can make calm decisions guided by their thoughtfully developed core values. They can do this while remaining in emotional connection to people. Obviously, becoming differentiated in this way is the work of a lifetime. If differentiation can be described as calming your own emotional reactivity while people around you are becoming reactive, while at the same time staying in emotional contact with those people, it becomes clear how difficult a process it is. While Bowen has at times been accused of being too cognitive, and downplaying emotion, that critique misunderstands what he was saying. He was actually describing how important it is to observe and think about one’s feelings before expressing those feelings reactively, especially for those in positions of leadership. Most of us would admit that some of the biggest leadership mistakes we have made have occurred when we were depleted and became emotionally reactive. Undifferentiated leaders allow the congregation or group to set their agenda and then try to become what others expect them to be. Obviously, excellence will never result. Differentiated leaders set boundaries around time and congregational expectations in order to carefully discern their leadership style, what their gifts are, and what excellence would mean to them. They are able to carefully convey this vision to board members and then collaboratively set boundaries to allow them to live into that vision, understanding that it will involve saying “no” to things that get in the way. Practice Tips Take time with a coach, or during a sabbatical, or in the midst of your spiritual practice, and write a brief summary of your vision for yourself in terms of pastoral excellence. Next, identify what is blocking your implementation of that vision. What action steps will need to be taken to set boundaries in order to live out that vision? One of the significant blocks to clear vision in ministry and maintaining the necessary boundaries to implement that vision is what Bowen referred to as multigenerational transmission. (The Old Testament referred to this as the sins of the fathers being passed on for generations.) Multigenerational transmission, as discussed in chapter 3, is the process by which roles, relationship patterns, and anxiety can be passed on for generations. For clergy, the concept of how family roles are passed on generationally is especially important since family roles have a major impact on leadership styles. The child who was the over-responsible member of the family, and was praised for doing everything, will have great difficulty in pastoral leadership saying “no.” The family peacemaker will spend too much time as a leader attempting to bring people together but may neglect any compelling vision other then helping people get along. The lost child, the child who received little or no attention or validation, may use ministry as a way to seek validation and therefore have great difficulty setting boundaries. These family roles can shape leadership in such a way that it is both difficult to set clear boundaries and even more difficult to pursue excellence. And as we have discussed repeatedly, during times of anxiety, these old family roles become even more pronounced. Unless these family roles are understood and reworked, leadership may be ineffective, and setting boundaries will prove difficult. Practice Tips Think about the role you played in your family of origin. How does that role impact your current leadership style? How does anxiety impact that style? Work with a coach or therapist on finding ways of better understanding and changing the impact of your family role on your leadership style. Most attempts to create change and to set limits in order to pursue excellence will meet with some resistance, which must be managed. It is not enough to simply say “no” without managing the feelings of people and groups who are not supportive of the changes being made. The literature on emotional intelligence (EI) [18] adds more detail to what Bowen was describing with the concept of differentiation and is an important part of this process. It explains how tiring ministry can be since it constantly involves both recognizing and regulating what you are feeling, recognizing what others are feeling, and then regulating the interaction between you and others. EI expert Daniel Goleman states that emotional intelligence has several dimensions. Simply stated, emotional intelligence is the ability to be both self-aware as well as socially aware. Both involve several components. Being self-aware means being both aware of what one is feeling at any given time, as well as being able to regulate those feelings. Kerr and Bowen refer to one aspect of this as having an internal anxiety meter so one is always aware of the level of one’s anxiety in interpersonal settings so as to not inadvertently become reactive. If the anxiety meter is in the “red zone,” it is essential not to act reactively but to find a way to slow things down. Emotionally intelligent leaders try to be in touch with what they are feeling and regulate those feelings so as to stay both clear and connected to the people around them. Imagine a highly conflicted board meeting. Pastor Alan is not well differentiated and not always self-aware. He becomes increasingly agitated and defensive as board members review his preaching. Finally, he blurts out, “No one is going to tell me what to preach or how to preach. I will preach what God tells me to preach.” The tension in the room and in the board meeting becomes even hotter. Board members are looking at each other uncomfortably, not knowing how to respond and becoming even more agitated. Pastor Alan was unaware of how irritated he had become and so was unable to regulate what he was feeling and then spoke from that irritation. As a result, he became even more alienated from his board. From a boundary-awareness perspective, Pastor Alan means well. He is trying to set boundaries to allow him to pursue his passion for excellence in preaching. However, his reactivity is blocking board members from even understanding what he is trying to do. Emotional intelligence for clergy leaders means both knowing what you feel in any given situation and then being able to regulate what you are feeling in the midst of managing networks of relationships. Consider Pastor Beth’s response to the same stressors. She recognized her own growing defensiveness and agitation with what her board was saying and decided this was not a good time to speak. She listened to the concerns of the board and then tried to summarize what their concerns were, asking if she was accurately hearing what they were saying. Reflective listening allowed her to relax a bit and to avoid blurting out a response in the midst of her agitation. She then assured the board she would give some thought to their concerns and would talk more to them about it at the next meeting but made sure that everyone in the room felt that she heard their concerns. Pastor Beth then suggested having breakfast the following week with the board chair to fully process what she was hearing from the board. This nonreactive strategy reduced the anxiety in the room, kept her well connected to the group, while not simply caving in to what the board wanted. Essentially, she was doing four things simultaneously: recognizing her own emotions, regulating those emotions, connecting to the thoughts and feelings of her board members, and using social skills to manage these relationships. Practice Tips Try to identify a time when you became highly defensive when your leadership or pastoral skills were being challenged. How did your anxiety manifest? Did you become defensive or agitated or just shut down? What would you have done differently if you could have recognized the level of your anxiety? Differentiation in times of low anxiety is not difficult. However, in times of heightened anxiety, it is much more difficult. Goleman refers to this as “low road circuitry,” which acts at high speed often under conscious awareness. It implies that too much happens automatically and without much critical thinking. As we described in chapter 3, the chronic anxiety of many congregations runs on low-road circuitry—like an underground railroad. And it is contagious. To shift to the high road, which provides us with more conscious choices, clergy must be able to be in touch with what is happening on the low road, what they are feeling, and then find differentiated strategies for keeping things on the high road. The high road means we are able to respond creatively, not reactively, even in the midst of emotional contagion. This is an important clergy boundary that is rarely discussed. Essentially it is a self-boundary aimed at keeping leaders from being impacted by low-road circuitry and staying differentiated to keep things on the high road. The goal is not simply to have good boundaries, and say “no” to overwork, but to be differentiated enough and self-aware enough to say “yes” to growth for yourself and the congregation. Healthy boundaries will keep us connected to our overwhelming “Yes.” Differentiation is also the ability to shift the discussion and process to the high road in the midst of heightened anxiety. It is not enough to simply be empathic: empathy can actually limit leadership. [19] Goleman suggests that leaders need not only empathy but also “social facility.” [20] He summarizes this thought by saying, “simply sensing how another feels, or knowing what they think or intend, does not guarantee fruitful interactions. Social facility builds on social awareness to allow smooth, effective interactions.” [21] This includes the ability to interact smoothly at the nonverbal level, shape the outcome of social interactions, as well as care about people’s needs and act accordingly. This “social facility” is what helps shape congregations and is an essential part of effective leadership. It is built on the capacity to stay on the high road even in the midst of chronic anxiety. Boundary setting based on improved differentiation is difficult to learn. Seminary trains the neocortex with courses in homiletics, pastoral care, church history, exegesis, and so forth. However, differentiation and emotional intelligence are related to the limbic system, the seat of the emotions, which is neglected in seminary coursework. Describing the concept of differentiation is easier than living as a differentiated self. The best way to understand the complexity of the concept and to experience being on the “low road” is to imagine going home to your entire family for the holidays. What a training for the limbic system! How many days can you remain nonreactive without getting hooked by siblings, parents, or other relatives and beginning to feel like you are fifteen again? Old “dances” die hard, and family members know how to bring out the worst in each other. But differentiation is not simply about remaining nonreactive or avoiding getting pulled into old dances or roles. It is also the capacity to maintain one-to-one relationships with key members of the family without getting caught in those old reactive dances. In Bowen-based therapy or effective clergy groups, clergy do not simply explore their family legacies. Rather, they are coached to go home, move toward anxious relationships, and practice not only becoming emotionally nonreactive but also engaging more intimately in important relationships. In the language of emotional intelligence, this is not cognitive training but training the limbic system through exposure to anxious interpersonal situations. Practice Tips Think about the last time you returned to your family of origin. What “buttons” got pushed and by whom? Once you were “hooked,” what happened? Pretend you can watch it as a video. What do you notice about your style once you became reactive? Pastor Don, for example, believed that by going home to his fundamentalist family and describing the progressive theology he was reading and taking a proud position on controversial social issues, he was being differentiated. In reality, he was demonstrating a type of emotional reactivity. He was not trying to understand his family members and was not working on deeper understandings and connections with family members. Pastor Don’s reactive position (which he naively thought was differentiation) created a type of emotional cutoff preventing him from getting close to any family members, while feeling proud that he was demonstrating how different he was from his family. Not surprisingly, this same style was creating problems with key board members in his congregation. Pastor Don was proud of his ability to say “no” to certain committees he did not want to be part of but did so more reactively, thereby alienating key church members. Saying “no” in a reactive way often misses what the group (often boards or committees) are concerned or frightened about. Saying “no” reactively is often an angry “no” to a request, as opposed to responding in a way that stays connected. For example, “I can appreciate that you want me to spend more time visiting parishioners and certainly don’t want to minimize how important that is, but at the same time, I need time to focus on the priorities we established for the year.” Fortunately, the clergy group Don was part of was able to gently challenge what he was doing and could see how his reactive style was creating alienation. They urged him to find a therapist/coach who was familiar with Bowen principles. He was helped by both his therapist and his group to begin building a very different type of relationship with his family by working at nonreactively getting to know family members, without giving up who he was. His clergy group helped him apply those principles to his congregation, and he began to see that, in order to lead effectively, he needed to make a significant shift in leadership style. His therapist helped him to understand that he was replicating his reactive style that he had used to deal with his family and helped him build some tools to handle conflict differently. These involved learning to stay in touch with what he was feeling, slow down when he felt anxious or angry, and role-play responses that kept him better connected to key people. Unfortunately, it is often difficult for clergy to know how to find a therapist who is acquainted with the overlapping systems of congregations, families, and selves. We believe that it is helpful for each area judicatory to have a solid referral list of good therapists for clergy to consult with that are trained in this type of work. You can also narrow your search by asking psychotherapists if they have experience in family, systems, or Bowenian types of therapy. A significant part of training in Bowen family systems is not just understanding theory but also being part of a family-of-origin group, where participants are coached to go home frequently and understand themselves in the context of a multigenerational family. The work is experiential, not simply cognitive; going home helps us work on differentiation by building nonreactive relationships with family members, stepping out of old triangles and old roles. It takes us beyond the old joke about psychoanalysis: “After ten years of therapy, I can talk about my father—I still can’t talk to him, but I can talk about him.” Bowen-based therapy aims at doing the work “live.” Shifting dynamics in situ improves differentiation because reactivity is managed in the moment it is occurring and with the very person triggering the anxiety. In fact, many Bowen-based therapists believe that traditional therapy creates a situation where individuals talk to their therapists about their “dysfunctional families,” thereby creating yet another triangle where the family will look even more negative. It is all too easy to talk about difficult family members or even complicated parishioners to a well-meaning empathic therapist. However, the therapist is only hearing one side, and if they inadvertently appear to agree about how difficult the family member or parishioner is, a triangle is created. This lowers anxiety initially, but in the end, the primary relationship does not get worked on. In the case of clergy, when a triangle is created, an opportunity to grow in leadership and the ability to set clear boundaries is lost. A Bowen-based therapist will always coach the person they are working with to move toward the anxiety and toward the relationship as a necessary step to growing more differentiated. Working on differentiation for clergy leaders means also recognizing the blocks to differentiation in the interest of making creative changes. Pastor Sarah was a prime example. Growing up in a large family, she was the “good girl” who did everything right and was viewed by her family as the most responsible member. She received constant validation from her parents for the good choices she made and for being so much more responsible than her siblings. Not surprisingly, this pattern followed her in ministry. Pastor Sarah tried hard to please everyone and worked tirelessly to keep all the members of her rural congregation happy. It was very difficult for her to say “no” to anything. In fact, just thinking about setting limits and saying “no” created significant anxiety. Yet the harder she worked, the more unsatisfied she became. After three years of ministry, she began to feel like she was in the wrong profession and was not putting much time into doing any of the things she looked forward to while in seminary. Fortunately, she received some excellent advice from some trusted colleagues in her clergy group and sought out a therapist who was well acquainted with some of the unique issues clergy struggle with. Pastor Sarah learned to take more “differentiated positions” and was encouraged to say “no” to things that distracted her from her passions. Initially, the therapeutic work was exhausting. Pastor Sarah acknowledged that she was often unable to state what she was really passionate about because the thought of making changes caused significant anxiety in people in her congregation. She struggled with the thought that making changes would leave some members disappointed with her and that people would be let down. Gradually, Pastor Sarah began to realize how much she needed affirmation and to be liked. She found therapy to be difficult work and learned that change was slow. She needed the patient coaching of her therapist to support her both in defining her ministry strengths, as well as coping with the anxiety that followed whenever she felt she was disappointing people. As Pastor Sarah began to realize just how much she needed affirmation and began to share some of her insights with trusted colleagues in her clergy group, she experienced their support to help her continue to “hold on to herself” and become firmer about what she was really passionate about in her ministry. She was able to use her strong emotional intelligence to both set limits and actively engage people in a way that enlisted their support. She began wisely by talking to her board about how together they needed to reset priorities for her ministry. She shared with them some of her passion for some new and creative programs. She asked for their help in deciding what activities she could step back from in order to focus on priorities. Initially her board was supportive and helpful, and slowly, she began to regain her passion for ministry. Pastor Sarah’s preaching and worship began to improve, and she was able to initiate some new, creative ministry programs. However, that was not the end of the story. At the same time, she continued to wrestle with her need to please people. In particular, she struggled with the chair of her administrative board, who was quite demanding. Saying “no” to her was especially difficult. Pastor Sarah and her therapist spent time role-playing how best to respond, and then processing the difficult feelings that emerged. Sarah was engaged in insight-oriented therapy: as she gained insight, she also practiced setting limits and boundaries with the coaching of her therapist. The support of both her therapist and clergy group proved invaluable. Sarah’s need to be liked, her excessive needs for validation, as well as her old family role had been activated in the new congregational family. But the work she did enabled her to know herself much better and to make significant changes. Not surprisingly, as Pastor Sarah moves toward her unique pastoral excellence, her congregation is doing well. What about Gender Differences? Earlier in the text, we reviewed statistics of CSM that overwhelmingly identify male clergy as the perpetrators of CSM and identify women as the victims/survivors. We wondered whether there is any connection between these statistics and the ways in which men and women may experience different disturbances in healthy selfhood. For example, if men are more likely to develop “grandiose” narcissism, sins such as pride and domination may cause them to act out sexually and in other ways. In contrast, women may develop “vulnerable” narcissism, subject to poor self-esteem diminishing rather than asserting their leadership. While these are obviously generalizations and based on conjecture rather than research, they are worthy of our reflection. Practice Tips For women: is it more difficult to set boundaries because of early socialization into patterns of feminine behavior? How might you practice asserting yourself as a leader? Get more help at home? How might you identify and work with internalized criticism so that you are better able to protect your needs and lead from a healthy self? For men: in what ways have you learned to act rather than reflect? How might you engage in practices that help identify and protect your emotional needs? Your relationships? Support for Setting and Maintaining Boundaries While sabbaticals, reading, hobbies, friends, and more are continually suggested to clergy to support their self-care and boundary work, these may not help us get to the root of our problems with saying “no.” We believe that for clergy to make significant progress in setting boundaries, they need to continue to work toward increased self-differentiation and recognize personal obstacles to differentiation. Differentiation helps us observe system patterns and observe ourselves and what we are really passionate about and whether we are moving toward a “yes” of pastoral excellence. But growth in differentiation is a slow process and requires practice over time and with accountability partners. We suggest three ways to help us deepen our capacity for differentiated leadership—ways that have been tested over time and found life-changing for many clergy: facilitated/structured clergy groups, coaching/therapy, and spiritual practice. Clergy Groups As mentioned above, Janet Maykus and Penny Marler researched the kinds of peer learning groups that were most effective for clergy. In their study of SPE peer groups as well as clergy who responded to two national surveys, they found that peer-group involvement was high. In the two national surveys, over 75 percent of clergy respondents participated in peer groups. What did the clergy in this large pool rate as most helpful? As you look for a clergy group, keep in mind their findings. The peer groups rated as most beneficial were structured in ways that brought about the following critical factors: Regular attendance Group meetings guided by a formal covenant A high-quality leader or facilitator Denominationally diverse Group intimacy and accountability Practices that encouraged expressing spirituality in creative ways [22] Family-of-Origin Groups Using a trained facilitator, clergy are helped to make a multigenerational genogram to track patterns, roles, and the flow of anxiety but then begin to make more and more trips home to work on significant relationships. The goal is never to change another but to change your pattern of relating, becoming more nonreactive and attempting to build a more intimate relationship even with difficult family members without drifting back into old roles. These types of groups have great power to help shift leadership patterns and strengthen healthy boundaries. Coaching/Therapy It is one thing to understand the concept of differentiation but another to implement it. To learn differentiation is to move constantly toward relational anxiety. To do that without a good coach or therapist is very difficult. Our patterns are wired, and we drift onto the “low road” much too easily. The role of a therapist or coach is to help us look carefully at our gifts, at what we are passionate about, and at how our lack of boundaries might be blocking us from excellence. Not all types of therapy will help move toward excellence. Therapy that only focuses on insight may be very helpful but needs as well to hold us accountable toward making the changes that are necessary for excellence in ministry. Therapy or coaching must focus on helping clergy understand their family backgrounds, their roles in their families, as well as understanding how they respond in times of increased anxiety or conflict. Therapy and coaching will then help clergy learn to move toward difficult people and groups using emotional intelligence, while holding onto themselves in leadership. It is not simply about being a “people pleaser.” That is not leadership, as Friedman points out in his book called A Failure of Nerve. [23] A good coach or therapist will not only help clergy understand the issues that they bring but also will help them clarify their leadership styles, keep them in touch with their passions, and help them set limits so those passions can be pursued. Spiritual Practices How does nurturing spiritual practice help us create stronger boundaries? In her book Leaders Who Last: Sustaining Yourself and Your Ministry, the Rev. Margaret J. Marcuson, [24] teacher, coach and consultant, offers many practical suggestions for deepening our self-awareness, increasing our capacity for differentiated leadership, and assessing our congregational systems. In her final chapter, “Saying Our Prayers,” Marcuson notes that “we will be better prepared to face the challenges of ministry when we adopt and develop spiritual practices that are right for us.” She writes about the benefits of meditation, practicing awareness, keeping silence, praying for others, and knowing our own faith story. Whatever practice you choose, make sure you choose a practice that helps you remember and reconnect with the overwhelming Yes that inspired you to choose ministry, a practice that helps ground you in your truest self. One practice that is worth emphasizing is meditation. Since Marcuson’s book was published, and even earlier, brain researchers have been exploring the significant changes that occur with meditative practices. Among the most important for differentiation and setting boundaries: meditation enables us to become more attuned to ourselves, increasing our capacity for self-regulation. Meditation also can help us reconnect with God, with our call, and with the hopes and aspirations we have carried for ourselves and for the congregations we lead. Whether through centering prayer practices such as those taught by Thomas Keating or Basil Pennington [25] or through mystical or contemplative traditions, meditation is a spiritual practice that can help us set boundaries around our time and develop the capacities to set better boundaries in our congregations. How to Say “No” to Say “Yes”—for Personnel Committees Personnel committees (which have different names, depending on your denominational context) can be a wonderful resource to clergy in helping them set and maintain boundaries. First, the committee must understand how important boundaries are for the sake of congregational vitality and work carefully with their minister to help set and support those boundaries. If such a committee does not exist in your congregation, ask for a model from your denominational office or from trusted clergy colleagues. If this type of committee does not exist in your congregation, make it a priority to start one. Second, very practical strategies can be implemented such as regular meetings so that some members of the congregation begin to understand the need for clergy to take care of themselves and also help monitor that self-care is taking place. Committees can provide a coach for their minister, they can encourage sabbaticals and continuing education, and they can make sure there is money for both. They can help interpret to the larger congregation why such boundaries are essential. Successful boundaries are a team effort. It is impossible for clergy to maintain these types of boundaries alone. Working with a supportive and creative personnel committee can be enormously helpful. Boundaries and Congregational Vitality Throughout this book, we’ve noted the difference for clergy and for congregations when boundaries are encouraged by both parts of the system. Many clergy have the experience of going to a workshop or continuing-education event that encourages self-care only to return to their congregation and meet resistance when they attempt to take a day away. But some congregations are learning to support boundary setting for both their clergy and lay leaders, so that lay and clergy alike are not burned out through over-functioning. Theologian Serene Jones [26] tells the story of being part of a planning committee in her local United Church of Christ congregation. It was a lengthy process: three months of listening to the ideas of the members, three months imagining how to respond to current challenges and dreams. However, as the planning committee moved into developing strategies for all their ambitious ideas, “people’s faces looked increasingly strained, attendance began to drop, and ideas flowed less freely. At the end of a painfully unproductive meeting, the convener asked a senior member of the committee what she thought about the emerging plans.” Haven’t we all had this experience—watching grand ideas falter when it’s time for action? Thank goodness the senior member of this committee felt the freedom to tell the truth: “‘I’m sorry,’ she began, ‘I don’t mean to be negative, but when I look at this list I feel... so tired.’” [27] Honest dismay prompted the committee to step back, enter into a time of profound theological reflection, and change their focus. As Jones summarizes: “When we began to truly grasp the depth of God’s love for the world and the freedom that is given to us in that love, we not only felt the burden of our list lifted from our shoulders, we simultaneously came to see our list as a joyous response to the love that so freed us.” Or as another member of the committee commented: “‘When we begin to see that what we do as a church doesn’t matter ultimately, we are freed to see how very much our practices do matter.’” [28] An experience of feeling overwhelmed led to a time of theological reflection and discernment—where to let go and say “no,” where to open up and say “yes.” Setting boundaries for clergy is a matter of becoming clear about our false understandings of ourselves, others, and God. Clergy often act as if it is our job to save the church, a lesson many of us at early ages trained for in our families of origin. Or we act as if our parishioners can save us through their admiration and validation of us, instead of relying on God’s grace to save our congregations—and us. Congregations can get caught in the same kinds of false understandings as clergy. Part of our job as clergy is to model an understanding of who saves us—and for what. It is our job to preach, teach, and live a gospel that doesn’t depend on human over-functioning but on God’s grace. Ultimately, such a life enables us all to become masters of renunciation: saying “a hundred nos for the sake of an overwhelming Yes.” We conclude with an example. First Presbyterian Church had just called a new minister. They were clear in their call about the gifts they were looking for. They wanted a minister who could be a visionary and help lead them to a new way of being a church that would honor their proud history. They wanted someone who had strong preaching and leadership gifts. At the same time, they were enlightened enough to know they had to protect their new minister from excessive congregational demands that would force him to be a generalist and diminish excellence. They set up a personnel committee aimed at meeting regularly with their new minister to help him define and articulate his gifts and vision and encouraged regular study leave, time for study, and urged him to be part of a clergy group. They wanted to ensure that their new minister pursued excellence rather then trying to meet everyone’s demands. One of the more creative members of the committee suggested they pay for coaching for the first two years of ministry to help the new minister better refine his gifts and pursue excellence. Finally, they found ways to regularly interpret his priorities to the congregation so that congregants would form more realistic expectations of their new minister. This involved reviewing periodically priorities for both the congregation and pastor and regular discussion of these priorities in board meetings so success could be measured. It also meant communicating these priorities to the congregation so communication stays open. While this is an example of an unusually enlightened committee, and some might say, “How can they afford this kind of focus?” the committee members would respond, “How can we afford not to provide this level of support, if we want to reinvent our church to meet the needs of the new generation?” Ultimately, setting boundaries is about saying “no” to the things that drain our focus and saying “yes” to a call to pastoral excellence. In writing this book, our hope is that you and your congregation will find your way to practicing boundaries that enable passionate ministry in the name of an overwhelming Yes. 1. David Brooks, “The Leadership Revival,” New York Times, January 14, 2014. 2. Malcolm Gladwell, Outliers: The Story of Success (New York: Back Bay Books, 2008), 40. 3. Daniel Levitin, This Is Your Brain on Music: The Science of a Human Obsession (New York: Dutton, 2006), 197. 4. Craig Dykstra, “On Our Way: Living into God’s Future” (presentation, Indianapolis, May 11–13, 2011). 5. Ibid. 6. L. Gregory Jones and Kevin R. Armstrong, Resurrecting Excellence: Shaping Faithful Christian Ministry (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2006), 1. 7. Ibid., 41. 8. Jackson W. Carroll, God’s Potters: Pastoral Leadership and the Shaping of Congregations (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2006). 9. “Sustaining Pastoral Excellence,” Lilly Endowment, accessed March 18, 2014, www.lillyendowment.org/religion_spe.html. 10. Austin Presbyterian Seminary College of Pastoral Leaders, “A Study of the Effects of Participation in SPE Pastoral Leader Peer Groups: Survey Report and Analysis,” April 2010, 4–6. 11. Ibid., 10. 12. Ibid., 22. 13. Ibid., 21. 14. Ibid., 30. 15. Friedman, Generation to Generation; Friedman, A Failure of Nerve; Steinke, Congregational Leadership; Peter L. Steinke, Healthy Congregations: A Systems Approach (Herndon, VA: Alban 1996). 16. Kerr and Bowen, Family Evaluation, 145. 17. Murray Bowen, Family Therapy in Clinical Practice (New York: Jason Aronson, 1978). 18. Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More than IQ (New York: Bantam, 2006). 19. Friedman, Failure of Nerve. 20. Goleman, Emotional Intelligence, 84. 21. Ibid. 22. Austin Presbyterian Seminary College of Pastoral Leaders, “A Study of the Effects of Participation in SPE Pastoral Leader Peer Groups,” 28. 23. Friedman, Failure of Nerve. 24. Margaret J. Marcuson, Leaders Who Last: Sustaining Yourself and Your Ministry (New York: Seabury, 2009). 25. Basil M. Pennington, Centering Prayer: Renewing an Ancient Christian Prayer Form (New York: Image Books, 1982); Thomas Keating, Open Mind, Open Heart: The Contemplative Dimension of the Gospel (New York: Continuum, 2006). 26. Serene Jones, “Graced Practices: Excellence and Freedom in the Christian Life,” in Practicing Theology: Beliefs and Practices in Christian Life, ed. Miroslav Volf and Dorothy Bass (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2002), 51–77. 27. Ibid., 52. 28. Ibid., 66.