Chapter Appendix 1 Boundary-Awareness Training A Workshop Outline This program is offered in either four-hour or eight-hour workshops. The eight-hour time frame allows for more discussion and interaction. Part 1: Why Are We Here? This section is an overview of the long-term problem of clergy sexual misconduct that created a need for boundary-awareness training. In this section, we examine the contributions of Marie Fortune around issues of sexual misconduct, as well as expanding the concept of Boundary Awareness to a number of other issues. Clergy are helped to see that boundaries also apply to self-care, continuing education, social media, time management, and the difficulty many clergy have saying “no” in order to say “yes” to the pursuit of excellence. It is important in this opening section for clergy to recognize a broader definition of boundaries to ensure better participation in the workshop. Part 1 also examines statistics that compare clergy sexual misconduct to the other helping professions and then explores how the context of parish ministry creates unique boundary concerns. Finally, ministry boundaries are defined and discussed by the group. An opening question to the group is “how many boundaries have you violated in the last week?” Gradually, participants begin to identify how they said “yes” to things they did not want to be part of, did not take days off, neglected physical exercise as well as spiritual disciplines, and so forth. This discussion begins to build buy-in for the rest of the day’s agenda. Part 2: Overview of Boundary Problems The next session focuses on group brainstorming on types of boundary problems that clergy typically encounter, ranging from conflict-of-interest issues, to financial issues, sexual issues, the problem of congregants wanting to be friends, and the problem of regulating distance, as well as how best to handle the issue of social media and email. Sexual-Boundary Issues This section explores the paradigm shift that was introduced by Marie Fortune when she defined sexual contact between clergy and a parishioner not as an affair but as sexual and professional misconduct, with dynamics similar to incest. In this section, we explore differences in power and conclude that there can never be meaningful consent between clergy and congregants due to this imbalance of power. We also explore how misconduct occurs as an outgrowth of pastoral counseling sessions. Finally, this section reviews types of clergy sexual misconduct ranging from sexual harassment, pedophilia, various sexual addictions, and problems with pornography. We conclude by differentiating the sexual predator—with numerous victims—from onetime sexual misconduct usually growing out of a sense of deep personal depletion. The group brainstorms how religious leaders might best handle both types of cases of clergy sexual misconduct. Part 3: Why Are Boundaries so Difficult to Maintain? Part 3 reviews what boundaries are and then asks the questions: “Why are boundaries so hard to maintain? Why is it so hard to say ‘no’ to things we really do not want to do in order to say ‘yes’ to things we are passionate about?” In this section, we look at three aspects of what makes boundaries difficult to maintain: Issues of the self. The psychoanalytic contributions of Carl Jung and Heinz Kohut are reviewed. From Jung’s perspective, the problem of the God complex for clergy is discussed in some depth and how it is possible for clergy to over-function to such an extent that they develop a savior complex. From Kohut’s perspective, the need for validation and affirmation as well as the need to be liked is discussed as a way of explaining why it is so hard to say “no.” If clergy need to be liked and need validation, they may over-function in order to gain more validation. Examples and discussion questions help participants begin to realize how their deep yearning for affirmation and need to be liked can drive them to both burnout and misconduct. Issues of the anxious congregational system. Clergy do not function in a vacuum. Rather, they function in systems that actually resent boundaries and in this sense help to cocreate boundary problems. General systems theory is used to understand how systems function, as well as how chronic anxiety impacts system functioning. In particular, the implications of systems theory for anxious mainline congregations is discussed, and participants spend time brainstorming how their anxious congregations function and the pressure they absorb from their immersion in anxious systems. Issues of a self that needs validation and interacts with a chronically anxious system. When clergy needs for validation interact with anxious systems, the result can be both burnout and boundary problems. Part 4: Prevention The workshop ends with a focus on prevention and how to set boundaries that result in greater ministerial health and excellence. Three areas are examined: Murray Bowen’s systems-theory concept of “differentiation” is introduced and applied to clergy with the understanding that boundaries can only be set effectively when levels of differentiation are improved. The notion of differentiation of self is expanded to include the concept of “emotional intelligence” and to help clergy take more practical steps toward setting clear boundaries while staying connected to parishioners. The role of clergy groups in prevention is explored. Clergy groups can be a resource for deepening differentiation of self and emotional intelligence. In addition, they provide great support for clergy dealing with anxious congregations.