Chapter 2 Healthy Selves and Boundaries Our limits are frequently self-evident. We all have experienced a time when we hear a request and feel our internal resistance building. Often when we are asked to take on an additional responsibility, our internal answer is, “No way!” Yet out of our mouths comes the phrase, “I’d be glad to help.” When we say “yes” when our instinct is to say “no”—depending on our status and the kind of request—we may find ourselves weighed down with regret, agitation, fatigue, and more. On some level, we believe we have let ourselves down. Recall Pastor Martha from chapter 1. As time went on, Martha knew she was burning the candle on both ends. She discussed her contract with her personnel committee, determined to cut back on her hours. The season of Advent was approaching, with additional worship activities to plan in addition to her usual ministry demands. Because she had young children, Christmas preparations and events for her family added to her customary load at home. When the deacons reminded her that they “always” offered an extra adult class in Advent, Pastor Martha knew this was beyond her capacity. She had no creative energy to initiate such a class, thought the response would be poor, and knew it would overtax her in an already-busy season. But she knew that there were rumblings in the congregation because she had stopped attending all the evening committee meetings and had even proposed hiring someone else to work with youth. Pastor Martha was raised by parents who had high expectations that she never seemed to meet. Warding off criticism had become a way of life for her. So she gave in: after all, how hard could it be to lead a short-term book-discussion group? Pastor Martha said “yes” when every bone in her body wanted to say “no.” Martha was too busy to advertise the group widely. Attendance was as sparse as she had predicted, and because of an additional preparation, she had less energy and passion to invest in Advent and Christmas worship services. Ironically, her inability to say “no” limited her creativity and energy during Advent. Some requests don’t stir up internal resistance or disquiet. We are happy to respond, because we are fairly confident that the skills and pastoral presence we offer can make a difference. Saying “yes” to some requests feels like the fulfillment of all we hoped when we entered ministry. These requests, while taking additional time and energy, are part of what we identify as excellent ministry, and when we fulfill these requests, they leave us with more, not less, energy for ministry. What’s the difference? Suppose Martha made a conscious decision to pace herself more slowly through the Advent season? What if she encouraged her congregation to put their efforts into fewer activities for which she and the parishioners had room to prepare? When one of the congregation’s members died just before Christmas, Martha now had time to be with the family and lead them through the grief of loss and planning a memorial service during this busy time of the year. Knowing the memorial service would interfere with her home schedule, she reached out for additional help from her babysitter. She even kept an appointment with the therapist she had engaged that fall, after realizing she was giving in to congregational demands that were burning her out and not helping the congregation either. Even though Martha’s workload was busier than usual, she knew that helping the family and congregation celebrate an important life in the midst of Advent and Christmas preparations was part of what she most loved about ministry and would renew her faith as well as the faith of the family and the congregation. Because she wasn’t as overstretched as she might have been, she was able to give her best to planning and conducting the memorial service. Since some requests don’t stir up internal conflict, all the more striking, then, are the times we say “yes” and we know we should say “no.” How do we understand saying “yes” when we know better? This chapter looks at some of the internal reasons we may say “yes” despite knowing that we need to define our limits. Healthy Selves Self psychology, a psychological theory of individual development based on the contributions of Heinz Kohut (1913–1981), provides one clue to understanding why we say “yes” when we want to say “no.” Kohut trained as a psychoanalyst but soon came to believe that orthodox Freudian psychoanalysis was unable to resolve the problems of the patients who had come to him for help. He developed a theory of self-development through his work with those whose selfhood was fragile and who suffered from a lack of vitality. Self psychology explains the human longing for appreciation and validation that is part of normal development. Self psychology also helps us understand that when children do not receive enough validating, appreciative responses, they are left vulnerable to perceived slights, rejections, and low self-esteem (what we mean by fragile selfhood). When we arrive in ministry with a shortage of internal resources to soothe and value ourselves, our longing for admiration and validation can drive us into the ground or lead us to make poor choices. In the paragraph above, we’ve introduced two central concepts in self psychology. Validating and affirming responses, often referred to as “mirroring” responses, enable us to know more of ourselves, when our feelings, capacities, and needs are reflected authentically. “Self-soothing,” the self’s capacity to provide comfort and validation for ourselves, is essential to maintaining healthy self-esteem—especially when affirmation is lacking in the responses of those around us. Self psychology makes sense of our experience: when we are able to soothe ourselves over the course of life’s ups and downs, we know ourselves to be more healthy than fragile. What do we mean by the word “self”? Without getting into philosophical discussions, we use this word in its most self-evident fashion. For us, as for Kohut, the self is a unifying concept. By “self,” we mean the center of ourselves, what holds us together. “Without being taught it you sense that you are a self; and... you also sense that your self is the nucleus, the core of who you are.” [1] Selves can be healthy or unhealthy. In Kohut’s understanding, a healthy self is cohesive—that is, it can withstand challenges. A healthy self has continuity over time—that is, it provides a consistent sense of self-worth. And a healthy self is marked by vitality—that is, cohesion and consistency instill a resilience throughout life’s vicissitudes. Following from this understanding, a self fails to be healthy when it is falling apart, inconsistent, or frail. How does the healthy self develop? Like other theorists, such as English pediatrician and psychoanalyst Donald W. Winnicott (1896–1971), Kohut understood that parents aren’t, and don’t need to be, perfect—but they need to provide “good enough” parenting. In optimal parenting, children have role models they can idealize and from whom they receive admiration for their gradually developing talents and skills. These two constituents of the self, having caregivers we idealize and from whom we receive admiration, form the core of healthy self-development. Good-enough parents provide adequate mirroring of who we are and who we are becoming and provide ideals to which we aspire, the foundation of our values and goals. Optimal parenting provides an environment in which we develop healthy ambition, initiative, and assertiveness. Good-enough parents aren’t perfect—and that lack of perfection is also an essential part of healthy development. Through early experiences of frustration, we learn that sometimes we must wait to have our needs met and that our caregivers won’t always provide the empathic attunement (to use one of self psychology’s key phrases) we need. Through early experiences of frustration as well as our response to this frustration, we begin to experience our caregivers and ourselves as worthwhile. As we learn to trust that the caregiver will respond, however imperfectly, we form an internal self-structure that regulates our self-esteem and affirms us through the ebb and flow of support from our caregiver. We never outgrow our need for mirroring. But as we learn we can cope with the ebb and flow of support, we learn as well that, overall, we can count on others and ourselves. Believing that we can trust others as well as ourselves enables us to develop a healthy narcissism—where the grandiosity of our infantile need for admiration is transformed into adult humor, creativity, empathy, and wisdom. When our early experiences lead us to feel primarily mistrustful of others and to believe we do not have enough inner resources to weather the ebb and flow of life, we become vulnerable to a reactive, defensive narcissism. Our mistrust results when caregivers—over and over again—are not dependable. When we do not experience supportive relationships and must lean on as yet inadequate internal resources, our self-esteem is easily vulnerable to slights and criticisms. We crave attention and are ashamed of our need for attention—especially if we’ve been taught that to seek attention is “selfish” and that to be selfish in this way is incompatible with following Jesus. We hesitate to ask for help and instead seek validation by being helpful to others. Ostensibly, being helpful in this way is compatible with the Gospel, but when it masks unconscious wounds and deficits, it can leave us open to being unconscious of our needs and acting them out in inappropriate ways. When we are able to receive support from our primary relationships, that support becomes an internal resource to us. Based on real relationships, these internalized resources are the building blocks of healthy selves. Thus, when life becomes unpredictable or difficult, these internalized or intrapsychic relationships enable us to tolerate threats to our self-esteem, to continue to value ourselves, and to survive the ups and downs of life. Self psychology refers to these internalized resources as “self-objects.” While this label is confusing, self psychologists mean by this term the experiences of interpersonal relationships that we internalize, the aspects of relationships (objects) we use to soothe and therefore consolidate or hold together the self. Self-objects bear some resemblance to real others and real relationships, but they are not identical with them. Our experience shapes what we take in of others and of our relationships. Self-objects are internal structures that we create out of our experiences to form reliable ways of validating and soothing ourselves. Many of us in the helping professions were raised in families where caregivers were unable—for multiple reasons—to provide us with a secure sense of ourselves. Perhaps our parents were in unhappy marriages themselves, or our parents were themselves raised by parents who were unable to mirror our parents’ talents and skills. Perhaps our caregivers were struggling with addictions or illnesses, or our families were overtaxed with illnesses among grandparents and/or siblings. The point here is not to blame but to call attention to the fact that sometimes caregivers cannot give what they do not have themselves. As children raised in such circumstances, we experience that our needs don’t count and compensate (meet our needs indirectly) by listening to and attending to the needs and feelings of others. Receiving infrequent validation from a parent can mean that we spend our lives—consciously and unconsciously—looking for the parent who will affirm us, listen to us, and respond to our needs. And receiving infrequent validation from a parent may cause us to give others what we crave in the misguided hope that they will return the favor. When we grow up needing validation, we are often unaware of the strength of that need until we bump up against the burnout or despair that comes when we find ourselves living for the acceptance and approval of others—saying “yes” when we want to say “no.” What the popular press calls a “people pleaser” is the kind of person depth psychologists are describing when they point to those who have difficulty saying “no” to requests that violate our boundaries—and do so because of early unmet needs that leave us vulnerable, needing (sometimes desperately) to be liked, to be loved, to be understood, to be known, to be admired, to be valued. Left unattended, such needs can create deep wells of vulnerability. A minister who came for counseling had formed an inappropriate relationship with a member of his congregation. As he tried to explain how this happened, he said, “I was feeling emotionally and spiritually exhausted. When I spent time with her, I felt alive again. She made me feel special. She told me how no one ever listened to her or understood her the way I did. I began to look forward to our meetings and didn’t want them to end because they felt so wonderful.” In the counseling process, the minister began to understand how his need for validation and attention easily led to an inappropriate relationship. The need for attention and validation can manifest itself in less egregious but equally troubling ways, in part because of the “slippery slope” of our unaddressed need. If you visit a family in crisis at two in the morning and they tell you for weeks afterward that you saved their family and are the most wonderful minister they have ever met, then what do you have to do to get more affirmation? Setting limits and boundaries will not deliver more of that craved affirmation. The need to be liked and appreciated makes saying “no” very difficult. Self psychology helps us understand why to our consternation we will say “yes” when we want to say anything but yes! And these concepts hold out hope—that if we can understand and work with our internal needs for mirroring and soothing, we can learn to respond in ways that are consonant with our boundaries. Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places The needs for affirmation and validation—to have one’s feelings understood and to be admired—are normal needs that become excessive when our childhood experiences leave us vulnerable. Needs for role models to emulate, to idealize, are also normal—and problematic if left unfulfilled. When we are vulnerable in these ways, we look for members of our congregation to meet our needs rather than working to meet their needs for ministry. For example, if we look to our congregations for the validation we missed, we will have difficulty engaging our congregations as leaders, which means saying things people need—but sometimes do not want—to hear (and risking not being liked by our congregations). If we lacked a parental figure to idealize, we may find ourselves unable to say “no” to keep a valued parishioner on a pedestal—to their detriment, our own, and possibly to the detriment of our congregation. Distinguishing when we are meeting our needs and when we are meeting the needs of our parishioners is challenging. The Roman Catholic priest, writer, and teacher Henri Nouwen (1932–1996) pointed out how our needs can make it difficult to differentiate between ourselves and others. Our needs take over, and, Nouwen wrote, The question no longer is, “Who is he?” but, “What can I get from him?”—and we no longer listen to what he is saying but to what we can do with what he is saying. Then the fulfillment of our unrecognized need for sympathy, friendship, popularity, success, understanding, money or a career becomes our concern, and instead of paying attention to the other person we impose ourselves upon him with intrusive curiosity. [2] When our selfhood is fragile, in need of the shoring up from others that was in short supply in our childhoods, we may find ourselves looking to members of our congregations for self-objects, functioning to shore up our fragile self-worth. A role reversal takes place where parishioners become self-objects for the minister as opposed to the minister being the self-object for them. Many of us have watched parents becoming overly excited at Little League or soccer games and wondered why they are acting so inappropriately. Their child is functioning for them as a self-object and grounding their self-esteem. The parent’s thinking is, if my child is a great athlete or great student and goes to a prestigious college, then I must have been a good parent. Roles have shifted: the parent is not there to admire the child for the child’s sake, but rather the child’s success is essential for the parent’s self-esteem. Our role as clergy is to serve as self-objects for our congregations—to help them through times of crisis by providing the support that strengthens their sense of self, shoring up their capacity to survive the experiences that challenge their hope. No one is able to provide such support perfectly or consistently. But like good-enough parents, good-enough clergy provide glimpses of ideals and values to admire and motivate. Our empathy and affirmation helps our parishioners know themselves as valued, loved children of God. But if we as clergy are not able to see ourselves as valued, loved children of God, if we feel the vitality of our selfhood slipping away in the midst of personal and professional demands and have few boundaries for self-preservation, we can easily turn to parishioners for needed self-object responses. If we have few family, friends, or outside support, our reliance on our parishioners is unhealthy for us and for them. Our roles in our families of origin—which we will discuss in chapter 3—add to our understanding of why we say “yes” when we know we need to say “no.” Often clergy were the “hero” children growing up: over-responsible, taking care of the family, the peacemakers. When caregivers are impaired or unable to function— perhaps because they received inadequate care themselves—children sacrifice their needs to take care of their families. While their behavior can appear to those outside the family as heroic, what is not noticed is the cost of the validation these children receive from over-functioning in the family. When over-functioning is rewarded (for example, being praised for taking on tasks that belong to the absent or impaired caregiver), it is easy to keep over-functioning in hope of receiving more validation. Self-sacrifice and over-functioning become a pattern that is almost addictive. Self-worth is based on what we do rather than who we are: loved children of God—a recipe for clergy burnout. Kohut’s self psychology and family-systems theory give us ways to view a problem and an unfortunate solution that has developed as a result. As Kohut observed, our lack of validation leaves us vulnerable and unconscious of our needs. But by filling a family role of hero, we sacrifice our needs in order to take care of others, receiving praise for our sacrifice. We become self-objects without a healthy self, and until we are burned out, we may never notice how empty we are beneath our over-functioning. Rev. Amy self-referred herself for counseling. She described growing up as the oldest child in an alcoholic family: helping her parents with their finances, helping raise her siblings, and constantly living with anxiety, wondering when her parents would get in one of their no-holds-barred drunken confrontations. While her role as peacemaker and over-functioner was exhausting, and in some ways made it impossible for her to enjoy her high-school years, she received tremendous validation from both her family and extended family. She was seen as the one person who could do it all. Her sense of self was somewhat dependent on the validation she received for the hero role she played in her family of origin. In her work as a parish minister, she knew that she should be setting limits and saying “no,” but at the same time, she felt invigorated by the validation she received when she over-functioned. On some level, her family-of-origin role and the validation she received from that role kept her trapped in an endless cycle of not being able to say “no.” The validation was like oxygen—and it also led to burnout. Clergy and therapists don’t gravitate to the helping professions for only spiritual and altruistic reasons, as valid as these reasons are. Often, we have histories of inadequate response from our self- objects. We may have greater or lesser degrees of grandiosity, demanding that others meet our needs for admiration, acceptance, and applause. When we are starving for validating responses from our parishioners, Jung’s warning to his fellow analysts may apply equally well to clergy: Each profession carries its respective difficulties, and the danger... [is if] the patient assumes that his analyst is the fulfillment of his dreams, that he is not an ordinary doctor but a spiritual hero, and a sort of savior.... [The analyst] begins to feel if there are saviors, well, perhaps it is just possible I am one. [3] In what other profession are leaders called “the Reverend” and assumed to speak for God? In what other profession do leaders tell stories of their call to ministry that marks them as somehow special? No one gets past an ordination committee without telling a personal story of his or her call to ministry. Calls have precedents in the Bible: consider the prophets, who were called to less-than-glamorous work but whose trust in God provided the motivation to survive the most difficult of assignments. For clergy, too, a sense of call may carry us through many a troubled meeting, stressful season of the church year, too many funerals, and not enough time off. But we need to temper our sense of call with reality: knowing ourselves well enough to know where our selves falter, where we need shoring up, where we are vulnerable. Without such tempering, our calls can collude with our grandiosity. We may see ourselves as special, as being above rules, not requiring the self-care and boundaries that protect us. The ideas in the paragraph above—that calls to ministry need tempering—reflect an underlying concept of self psychology known as “narcissism.” Narcissism in the popular imagination has a negative connotation, referring to persons with traits of selfishness and self-centeredness. In self psychology, narcissism is understood differently—as an aspect of human development that can be healthy or unhealthy. When we develop normally from children to adults, our narcissism is tempered: we are assertive without domineering others; we have a positive self-image without feeling superior or entitled; we have appropriate ambition without manipulating others. In other words, we express healthy narcissism, not grandiosity. Unhealthy narcissism can develop in two directions: grandiosity, as described above, or what self psychologists call “vulnerable narcissism,” in which we suffer from the opposite of grandiosity: low self-esteem, a sense of shame at the core of our being, feelings of emptiness and helplessness. In other words, healthy narcissism is the center of a continuum, and unhealthy narcissism is found on either end of the continuum as grandiosity or vulnerability. In chapter 1, we cited the statistic that more men perpetrate clergy sexual misconduct and more women are the victim/survivors of CSM. Perhaps Kohut and the self psychologists offer one possible explanation: that unhealthy narcissism in men is more likely to be of the grandiose variety, expressed through domineering behaviors, superior and entitled attitudes. As Valerie Saiving, one of the founding voices of feminist theology, notes, theology has defined “pride” and domination as a sin. [4] But pride and domination may be more problematic for men than for women, whose very underdevelopment of selfhood could be understood as a sin. Sheryl Sandberg, the COO of Facebook, documents the multitude of ways in which women still have a long way to go to develop themselves in the world of work and leadership. [5] Many of us in the helping professions—from clergy to therapists (and in the case of the coauthors, both clergy and therapists)—turned to those professions to heal early wounds in our developing selves. In this chapter, we’ve explored the wounds of not receiving needed validation or the mirroring that enables us to soothe ourselves—foundations for healthy selfhood. We’ve also seen how a precocious, unconscious family role may spur us into levels of over-functioning that lead to burnout and boundary problems. Perhaps we chose our respective professions knowing our need for healing. Unable to ask for help directly, we approached our needs indirectly, by learning to help others. But our help will fall short if we don’t take the time to get to know our strengths and resources as well as our wounds, taking care not to project our needs onto those who need us. Henri Nouwen understood that if we are able to understand and address our own wounds, we will have a deeper capacity to help others in their healing process. Nouwen proclaims good news for the wounded healer: A deep understanding of his own pain makes it possible for him to convert his weakness into strength and to offer his own experience as a source of healing to those who are often lost in the darkness of their own misunderstood sufferings. [6] Practice Get to know your hot buttons. Identify a time in your ministry when you became furious with some issue or person. What was going on within you? Can you identify any needs within yourself that were unmet—for example, needs for admiration, recognition, and comfort? Get to know your vulnerabilities. Think of some instances in your life when you felt yourself in danger of disintegrating or falling apart, when you felt particularly vulnerable or weak. Describe those situations as fully as you can, especially exploring your inner needs and the responses (or lack of responses) from people around you. Get to know your strengths. Think of a time when you could have fallen apart because of a load of stress or difficult interactions. What did you need? How were your needs being met? What kept you from falling apart? Reflect on your spiritual resources. Identify a practice that helps you soothe yourself. For example, prayer for some is a way to connect with God as comforter, as the one to whom you belong, as the one whose recognition forms you. After you have identified a self-soothing ritual, practice it daily. 1. Terry D. Cooper and Robert L. Randall, Grace for the Injured Self: The Healing Approach of Heinz Kohut (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011), 2. 2. Henri J. M. Nouwen, The Wounded Healer: Ministry in Contemporary Society (New York: Doubleday, 1990), 90. 3. C. G. Jung, Analytic Psycholog: Its Theory and Practice (New York: Pantheon, 1968). 4. Valerie Saiving, “The Human Situation: A Feminine View,” in Woman Spirit Rising: A Feminist Reader in Religion, ed. Carol P. Christ and Judith Plaskow (New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 25–42. 5. Sheryl Sandberg, Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead (New York: Knopf, 2013). 6. Nouwen, The Wounded Healer, 87.