Chapter 3 Setting Boundaries in Anxious Congregational Systems At a congregational meeting in a large, suburban congregation struggling with multiple problems, a board member stood up to speak about what he considered the source of the congregation’s problems. He said with great authority, “The problem with our minister is that he does not understand that his job is to be available 24/7.” The board member went on to list a number of ways that the minister in question had set boundaries around his time. He listed in painful detail how their minister had set several nights to be family nights and how his wife did not go to all the women’s luncheons due to her own work schedule. He then reminded the congregation that their former minister, who had served the congregation for thirty-six years, told people to call him anytime and even donated all the honorariums from weddings and funerals back to the church. Sadly, no one from the congregation supported the current minister and his attempt to set healthy boundaries around his time. Nor did anyone challenge the accuracy of the board member’s statements or offer any type of rebuttal. The minister, who had attempted to set boundaries, had now become the focus of all that was wrong with the congregation. While healthy boundaries are essential for effective ministry, this example underscores how costly it can be to set boundaries without congregational support. This is especially true for congregations that are in decline and therefore anxious about the future. Such congregations hope desperately that their ministers’ efforts will turn the congregation around. Congregational anxiety and heightened expectations can create a very difficult context in which to set boundaries even for the most well-intentioned clergy. While not all congregations are anxiety driven, setting boundaries in those congregations that are struggling can prove to be extraordinarily challenging. In early boundary-awareness trainings, congregational resistance to boundaries was not addressed, but the topic has come up in every boundary-awareness training we have provided since 1995. Usually halfway through the training, someone asks: “Why is this not being taught in my congregation? My congregation pushes back when I set a boundary.” Even if clergy can understand the need for boundaries and work through their needs for validation and to be liked, as explained in the previous chapter, they are frequently trying to set boundaries in anxious church systems with high expectations. The higher the congregational anxiety, the more difficult it is to set limits, particularly for clergy in small congregations. In small-church contexts, clergy are expected to be generalists, successful at everything. If they try to set limits, focusing their efforts on a few specific pastoral activities, such as preaching and pastoral care, congregational resistance can be significant. Of course, less anxious congregations exist. Boards and personnel committees, encouraged by denominational leaders, can learn to support and encourage clergy in setting personal and professional limits. But systems theory reminds us that thinking about problems only in terms of individuals without understanding the context in which they work will never provide an adequate picture of the unique struggles individual clergy encounter in their particular work systems. This chapter helps readers better understand congregations as a system and the multiple factors that can interfere with clergies and congregations understanding and appreciating appropriate boundaries. This understanding is essential to effect change. Practical suggestions on how to work with congregations to set appropriate boundary expectations are offered in more detail in chapter 5. While systems theory is often identified with family therapy, general systems theory encompasses a way of seeing and thinking that is very different from traditional linear thinking. While family systems theory is obviously focused on family dynamics, general systems theory can be applied to much larger systems, such as congregations. Linear thinking assumes that A causes B, and any problem in B must be the result of A. In contrast, systems theory assumes that A and B are constantly influencing each other. Systems theory changes the way we conceptualize problems. For example, when a congregation is struggling, members often search for a simple cause. “Our problems are because our minister doesn’t reach out to the community,” or “If we could just get a new choir director, everything would be all right.” It is difficult for members of a congregation to look at their problem in context and recognize that, in fact, there is no one cause but rather that a number of factors—such as a changing community, aging congregation, poor communication by the board—are interacting. Many congregations have difficulty understanding the systemic nature of their problems. For example, members of First Baptist Church state that they do not trust their minister and that their problems are related to the need for a new minister. However, in examining the congregation through systems theory, a different picture emerges. The personnel committee has been in conflict with the minister but does not speak to the administrative board about the problem. The committee’s information has come largely from a few disgruntled members and the church secretary. The administrative board is aware of some of the issues but does not have regular conversations with the personnel committee. Meanwhile a “parking lot committee” has formed, and it has its own version of the problem and circulates its theories about the cause of the problem by email with another subset of the congregation. It is clear that First Baptist does have a problem with trust; it is not so clear that the problem is the minister. Rather, the way the system communicates has created a context where trust will be difficult to establish. Systems theory, in contrast to linear thinking, is concerned with understanding the relationship of the whole with its interacting parts, and the interaction of the whole with the larger environment. [1] Systems theory helps us understand people in the context of the environment in which they live and work and tries to explore all problems in a larger context. First Baptist is an example of the contextual nature of the problem. Not surprisingly, when we think systemically, our emphasis shifts from the intrapersonal to the interpersonal. Systems theory examines the congregation’s role along with other factors in the development of problems and how the congregational system can maintain and even exacerbate those problems in addition to other system factors such as historical issues and community issues. In the case of First Baptist, the poor communication between the board and committees, as well as the underground nature of communication, has created a context that makes problems difficult to resolve. So in a discussion of boundary problems, systems theory invites us to consider the contribution of the congregational system to the problem and how the congregation’s issues may even increase the prevalence of boundary problems and burnout. Systems theory also offers an explanation for how healthy systems work and how they can even build on their strengths. In any discussion of boundary issues, the system within which individuals act may make boundary setting more complicated, or it may create a context where boundaries are supported and ministry thrives. Urie Bronfenbrenner, [2] one of the pioneers of general systems theory, expanded the concept of a system to include multiple systems. His theory suggested that systems are embedded within systems and that in the end the individual does not have nearly as much agency as most of us would like to believe. In his theory of child development, Bronfenbrenner explains that the child is part of a family system, which in turn is part of an extended-family system, which is embedded in other systems (such as schools and churches), all of which in turn are part of a larger social system. When we visualize these interconnected systems, we become clear that helping the child is impossible without addressing the systems in which the child is embedded. This model was the impetus for the creation of Head Start and other social-service programs that aim to impact individuals through systemic interventions. Professionals influenced by Bronfenbrenner recognized that the most effective way to help a child was to work not only with the child but also to attempt to change the systems that the child was part of—for example, to work both with the child’s family as well as the school that the child attends. When the family and school work together to create common goals and plans for the child, the child’s behavior or academic performance often improves. Suppose Joey is having angry outbursts in school. Teaching him anger- management techniques will most likely not be helpful. Seeing Joey together with his family reveals, however, that his parents constantly fight in front of him and that tension permeates the family, in part because Joey’s father has been out of work for six months and is feeling very anxious and frustrated. When Joey’s parents can be helped to better manage both their anxiety and conflict, and then can learn appropriate ways to set clear boundaries with Joey, his angry outbursts may begin to change. When the parents can meet with teachers and they can all agree to use a common strategy when Joey becomes angry, Joey’s outbursts will most likely decrease as a result of getting the same message from both parents and teachers. As the communication between parents and teachers increases, Joey’s behavior will continue to improve. While it is important for Joey’s behavior to change, and he will certainly be given guidance for shifting his behavior, it is difficult for the change to occur unless the systems around Joey also change. Bronfenbrenner’s theory is useful in understanding the dilemmas many clergy face. Like Joey and his family, they are embedded in multiple contexts including a congregation, which, if it is embedded in the larger context of mainline Christianity, is in a system in decline. As congregations fear for their future in the midst of an aging and declining membership, they often become more anxious. And the mainline Christian church itself is embedded in a larger cultural system where younger people, especially in certain parts of the country, do not view institutional religion favorably. Using Bronfenbrenner’s theory helps put the problem of clergy in perspective. Too often, congregations expect that the many problems they are encountering can be fixed by a creative, energetic minister, without factoring in the larger cultural context. This obviously puts a lot of pressure on individual clergy and may make it even more difficult for them to set boundaries. As an example, First United Methodist Church was once a thriving dynamic parish. Its large sanctuary could hold eight hundred people, a new education wing had been added in its prime to accommodate a large church school, and in its golden years, both were packed. However, over the past thirty years, two of the primary employers in the community have shut down their operations, increasing unemployment and encouraging people to move away to find employment elsewhere. Now on a Sunday morning, there are often about seventy people sitting in a large sanctuary, and most are over the age of sixty-five. The Sunday school has a handful of kids, and the choir has declined to a few faithful singers. The board is afraid the congregation will not be able to afford both a full-time minister and a part-time organist, and board members worry about how they will raise the money to keep up their old building, which now needs a roof and a number of other repairs. They have decided the congregation will worship in the fellowship hall during the winter, so they do not have to pay to heat the sanctuary. They are desperately trying to rent office space in their educational wing to outside organizations to help ends meet. They have spent down much of the congregation’s endowment, and weekly giving covers only part of their budget. Recently, when the finance committee of the board met, anxiety escalated. The finance committee now predicts that the endowment will be exhausted in seven years, at which time the church may not be able to stay open. Not surprisingly, these discussions spike everyone’s anxiety even higher. Board and committee meetings are increasingly filled with tension, and members are becoming more reactive. Meanwhile, a large evangelical church a mile away is flourishing, drawing many young people, perhaps thanks to its contemporary worship style and large youth group. The solution of the board members was to hope the right minister would turn the church around. They were excited when Pastor Joann arrived as their minister. She was young, had great energy, and seemed to have good ideas. However, after she had been their leader for three years, not much had changed, at least according to the board. Despite some creative changes to worship and excellent pastoral care, neither the attendance nor giving had increased much. People were becoming more critical, and Joann was becoming anxious. She was constantly reminded that money was tight and that attendance was not increasing, despite her innovations and long workweeks. She began to have problems sleeping and sometimes woke in the middle of the night wondering what was going to happen. Joann knows that despite the criticism and increasing anxiety, she needs to take some time off for study leave. She has been working long hours and has neglected physical exercise as well as her spiritual disciplines. She wants to take a week off to attend a national preaching conference and connect with some old seminary friends, but when she mentions this to parishioners, people become negative and point to all the problems in the church, not to mention reminding her of the congregation’s tight budget. Her husband is worried and sees what the constant stress and pressure is doing to Joann and does not know what to do. From a boundary perspective, Joann knows she needs to say “no” to some things, take some time to regroup and reenergize. But setting boundaries in the context of First United Methodist will prove very difficult. She will need to find ways to inoculate herself from taking on the congregation’s anxiety, maintaining a commitment to taking care of herself relationally, spiritually, and physically while continuing to honor her call to ministry at First United Methodist. Important first steps will include enlisting the support of the congregation’s personnel committee for maintaining self-care, educating the congregation about the overlapping anxieties that are impacting their ministry, and helping them understand healthy and unhealthy responses to anxiety and to identify healthy responses for their congregation’s life and ministry. Reverend Joann and First United Methodist Church illustrate the problem of an individual trying to set boundaries in the midst of significant systemic anxiety. First United Methodist is anxious due to declining and aging membership and declining finances, in the midst of a community struggling with unemployment. Joann is anxious as a result of the pressure she feels to try to turn this congregation around. In chapter 5 we will explore some practical steps that Joann (and all clergy in similar situations) can take to address these very complicated issues around anxiety. As we will explore in chapter 5, anxiety is highly contagious, and therefore an important boundary for clergy in Joann’s situation will be to find ways of setting internal boundaries as a kind of inoculation against infection with congregational anxiety so that their own vision is sustained. The Contributions of Murray Bowen Murray Bowen’s theory [3] is extremely helpful in exploring in more depth the challenges of boundary setting and the potential for burnout. Many clergy are indirectly aware of the work of Murray Bowen due to the many authors who have popularized his theory, including the late Edwin Friedman and Ron Richardson, to name a few. [4] Bowen’s comprehensive theory greatly enhances our understanding of boundaries and burnout. Central to Bowen’s theory are eight basic concepts, which include: the family emotional system, multigenerational transmission, triangles, emotional cutoff, sibling position, differentiation of self, family projection process, and societal emotional system. Because a number of these concepts are particularly relevant to congregational systems, they are elaborated in what follows. Church as an Emotional System Central to Bowen’s theory is his understanding of the family as an emotional system that operates according to general systems theory. When systems theory asserts that the sum is always greater than the parts, it explains our experience that a system has a life of its own and is bigger and more complicated than the individual people in the system. To better understand this theory, try to visualize your frequent fight or argument with a significant other in your life (partner, child, family member, or friend). Pretend that your fight was caught on camera without you being aware of it. In watching the film of your argument in stop action, you would see how the argument begins and escalates, how emotion intensifies, how both people become more emotionally reactive, and finally how the argument ends. For many of us, this film would not be flattering. When we are especially anxious, stressed, or tired, we become more reactive, and our capacity for creative thinking or problem solving is diminished. Neuroscientists call this phenomenon an “amygdala hijack.” High anxiety makes it difficult to utilize the prefrontal cortex, and too often the more primitive part of the brain, the amygdala, takes over. The amygdala will often default to fight or flight or even freeze. During these times, our bodies are fueled by adrenaline, and we are hardly at our best. While we may want to believe that we are rational people, the film view of our argument shows that we are driven by emotion, not rationality. We may begin the argument attempting to not get “hooked” or become reactive, but in the end, the dance of emotional reactivity is set in motion. Bowen suggested that as families become more anxious and overwhelmed, an emotional process takes place that may start with a couple but might also pull in other members of the family. For example, during times of significant tension or anxiety, each spouse may lose self-awareness and blame the other for all the problems. Or one spouse may over-function to help contain the anxiety during a family crisis but then run the risk of becoming symptomatic. The anxiety spills over when a woman who overcompensates for her husband’s drinking and resultant problems at work becomes highly involved with her children’s school projects and winds up diagnosed with depression. Other couples may project their anxiety onto one of the children. As a child acts out in school, the couple’s anxiety may lessen, as they form more of a partnership to solve their child’s problem. All of these are examples of the family acting as an emotional system: an interdependent emotional unit in which family members function in reciprocal relationship to one another. [5] This concept of emotional system extends beyond families to congregations. Like families, congregational emotional process is rarely conscious and is often not understood. First Presbyterian Church, for example, was in crisis. Known for its social-justice stance, strong preaching, wonderful music program, and powerful history, the congregation has now begun to struggle. Their last minister, after almost thirty years of ministry characterized by a formal and authoritative style, retired due to health concerns and a number of rumors about misconduct. Following a two-year interim and a long nationwide search, their new minister, Reverend Alan, has been serving for three and a half years, bringing a style different from the congregation’s past experience with pastoral leadership. Despite its reputation as the strongest church in the community, attendance dropped, pledges were down, and anxiety was up. The congregation was aging, many members retired to a warmer climate, and younger families were not replacing lost members. As the anxiety increased, morale decreased. The board was split. One group was convinced they called the wrong minister. Another faction believed that they had never dealt with some of the issues surrounding their last minister, including allegations of alcoholism and possible sexual misconduct and a sense that he had coasted for the last five years of his ministry. The choir began to talk after practice about how they missed the style of music they used to sing before their new minister changed some of the music. Others believed, though, that they would need to make even more major changes in their programming and worship style to attract younger members. A group of wealthy older members stopped attending, held private meetings in one of their homes, and decided together to stop paying their pledges. Meanwhile, the personnel committee began a new evaluation process of their new minister without working with the board. In addition, Pastor Alan was considering updating his résumé, believing that he made a mistake coming to First Presbyterian. In Bowen’s theory, the congregational emotional system had become infected with anxiety. Communication had gone underground, groups were not talking directly to each other, and each group was projecting its anxiety on another group or issue. Since each group is projecting the anxiety onto another group or person, and not communicating directly, it will be difficult for anyone in this congregational emotional system to get a clear picture of the problem. On a much simpler level, think about board meetings or committee meetings that become reactive when a controversial topic comes up. Too often as emotions build, members begin to get reactive, and an emotional pattern emerges that leaves everyone frustrated and confused about what happened or how the discussion got so tense. By the end of the meeting, the emotional process makes resolving the issue impossible, and in some cases, group members cannot even get clear on what the real issue is. Both examples illustrate Bowen’s understanding of the emotional system. Clergy leaders are connected to parishioners, committees, and boards, which form networks of relationships or “families.” Emotional processes form between these networks and can make leadership extremely challenging. When congregational systems become anxious, they deal with the anxiety in a variety of ways. We’ll review in more detail projection, scapegoating, triangles, and multigenerational transmission. Family Projection Process Projection is one of the ways the emotional system handles anxiety. Bowen argues that as families become more anxious, they often project the anxiety onto one of their children, helping the parents feel less anxious. For example, if a couple’s marriage is in crisis and they have little to talk about, projecting a problem onto one of their children will give them a common problem to focus on, which will at least temporarily lower their anxiety and give them an issue in common. In the same way, anxious congregations like First Presbyterian project their anxiety onto a group, person, or cause. Projection initially lowers anxiety because it offers a simple solution to the problem. Following a consultation with a large suburban congregation, after I (David) had attempted to frame the larger systems issues, the board chair said with great authority, “Our problem is simple: we need a new minister who is a leader. Why are we talking about these other issues?” He had no interest in the congregation’s lack of trust, poor communication, committees that did not talk to each other, and informal committees that met in the parking lot and emailed their concerns to other members. He insisted, “If we had a real leader, these issues would disappear.” Scapegoating One powerful type of projection is scapegoating. The Old Testament concept of scapegoating described in the book of Leviticus evokes the tradition of bringing two male goats before the people. The High Priest slaughtered one goat as a sacrifice for the people. The other goat had a different function. The High Priest symbolically placed the sins of the people upon the second goat and sent it out into the wilderness as a sign of their sins being carried away. Family systems theory often uses the concept of a scapegoat to illustrate the way that some families function, focusing on one of their children as the problem in the family. “We would be a healthy family if Joan would just stop getting in so much trouble. She causes us so much stress.” That formulation of the problem blocks the family from exploring other causes of family stress and suggests a simplistic explanation of their problems as a family. While Joan may in fact be contributing significant stress to the family, there is likely much more going on in the family, with some family issues contributing to Joan’s acting out. But it is simpler—and decreases anxiety—if the family blames Joan as the scapegoat for all the family problems. In congregational life, too often clergy become the scapegoat for their congregations. Most congregations are concerned about growth, finance, and attracting younger families. They often have high expectations of their minister, and so when growth does not occur, congregations blame the minister, who functions as the scapegoat for the congregational problem. Other factors, such as an aging congregation that has been in decline for the last twenty years, as well as a changing community, are not factored in. The anxiety in this congregation all becomes focused on the minister—a simple target for all the congregation’s problems. It is far more complicated to look at a complex array of issues in a congregation, and so much easier to look for a single cause. Obviously, clergy are not the only persons scapegoated in congregations. However, clergy are only too aware of how quickly they can be scapegoated and so as a result find it difficult to set boundaries so as not to become the scapegoat for the systemic problems of the congregation. Triangles and Anxiety Another key Bowen concept is triangles. Dyads can be difficult to maintain in the midst of anxiety. When anxiety increases, the dyad frequently draws in a third person to temporarily stabilize the dyadic relationship. Consider our previous example in which a couple’s relationship becomes too anxious, so a third person, often one of their children, is pulled in. When that child acts out in school, the couple’s relationship is stabilized temporarily as the couple works together to help solve their child’s problem. Or consider the plight of two siblings attending a family reunion that they have dreaded attending. Both are somewhat anxious about being there and so begin to talk together about their youngest sibling that didn’t come to the reunion. As they talk about all of their sibling’s problems with alcohol and maintaining employment, their own anxiety about attending the reunion is lowered, and they have achieved a temporary sense of artificial intimacy. They are closer to each other at the expense of their sibling. Triangles in congregational settings are all too familiar. “Pastor, I want to tell you about what the Smith family is going through so you can pray for them and help them. Please don’t tell them I told you about their son’s legal problems.” The minister is now in an uncomfortable triangle. He has received information he cannot use, while the person telling him the secret is trying to achieve greater closeness by telling a secret. Triangles are a significant part of congregational life. A member of the personnel committee has lunch with Pastor Jeanne, who has been at St. Stephens for eight months. Over lunch, this board member begins to explain to Pastor Jeanne that several members of the board are becoming very critical of her preaching but then refuses to disclose which members are critical. He states he is very worried about Pastor Jeanne and wants to be helpful and suggests they meet for lunch to make plans on what to do about these unnamed board members. The men’s prayer group of the Church of the Good Shepherd talk frequently to Dan, their associate minister, about how ineffective the senior minister is and how they wish Dan had more authority in the congregation and wish he would preach more frequently. Dan appreciates their trust in him, as well as the affirmation that he receives from this group. At the same time, he is increasingly anxious about his relationship with his colleague Stan, the senior minister, which is becoming increasingly tense. A struggling Lutheran church decides that starting an alternative, contemporary worship service before their regular service would be a way to attract younger members. Several board members and their minister researched the structure of such a service and visited a number of congregations to experience this worship style. The board voted to move this concept forward and provided some financial resources to help it start. The new service was launched with some success. However, a number of members were bothered by this change and were convinced it was too much of a departure from their regular traditional liturgy. They organized an informal group and began sharing their concerns with other members about how their church was changing. A number of these disgruntled members began writing letters to the board suggesting that the board was too influenced by their young minister. The board became extremely anxious and decided to call a congregational meeting. In preparation for the meeting, those who were against the new service recruited inactive members to attend the meeting to support their cause. The level of anxiety had now increased significantly due to the triangles, and many people lost track of the actual issue as a result of being brought into the emotional triangles. Too often in a conflicted congregation, members who have been recruited into triangles do not even know what the real issues are. If clergy are not firm, setting clear boundaries when members attempt to pull them into triangles, they may find themselves more anxious and ineffective. The potential for becoming triangled by members, boards, and committees is enormous. As a result, it becomes important for clergy to work with their boards and committees to address clear ground rules for communication and help the boards accept this as a way of functioning. This would include ground rules for addressing problems directly, clear guidelines for not creating triangles by talking with others outside the official meetings about what the board is addressing, and practicing open communication. It can be very helpful to keep these ground rules posted during meetings. Some congregations with multiple staff have drafted church covenants that state that if a member tries to talk to one staff member about another, the staff member will ask the person to go with him to talk directly to the other staff person, thereby staying out of a potential triangle. Given the power of this issue, it is important that triangles and the need for direct communication, along with ground rules for congregational life, be discussed regularly. Multigenerational Transmission Another key Bowen principle is that of multigenerational transmission. Bowen suggests that looking at a family over three or four generations will reveal key patterns, such as how conflict is processed, the rules for intimacy, patterns of addiction and abuse, gender roles, and how anxiety is handled. Seeing only a one-generational picture of an individual is to see the individual out of context. Looking at a person in the context of a three- or four-generational genogram or family map presents a much different picture. Congregations also have histories that are important to understand. Many clergy have followed a long-term, beloved pastor and have been informed of how their predecessor worked seven days a week and was always available. That is difficult enough. However, many congregations also have secrets and unresolved conflicts that can easily become projected onto their new minister. When Pastor Larry arrived at First United Church, he was warmly welcomed. The first year went well, and people were pleased with his leadership and commented positively on his sermons. However, in his second year, Pastor Larry began to set several boundaries, including reshaping the job description of the church secretary, as well as posting his office hours and when he would be available for pastoral care. While these initial boundaries seemed proactive and positive, several people commented on his lack of availability when they called. Communication problems escalated when several triangles formed in the proverbial parking lot. As word traveled indirectly, several parishioners began to talk about not trusting Pastor Larry and wondering what he was doing when he was not in the office. Over the next year, more people began to talk about whether they could trust him. Larry was confused by what was happening and felt that, no matter how he explained himself, a number of people were still talking about how they didn’t trust him. What Pastor Larry did not know was that, two ministers ago, there had been a significant boundary violation involving sexual misconduct that was never processed openly. The offending minister left suddenly, and the misconduct was never discussed in any formal or direct way. Some people knew and talked to their friends about the situation, but the congregation as a whole never processed what happened. Some members were never let in on the secret. Not surprisingly, the minister who preceded Pastor Larry only lasted two years before he left, not knowing why no one seemed to trust his leadership. Bowen’s concept of multigenerational transmission explains how a congregation’s history can lead to significant projection on, and scapegoating of, the current minister, creating an impossible situation for pastoral self-care and boundaries. When joining a church system, a new minister has an opportunity to ask nonthreatening questions about his or her predecessors and what their leadership style was, simple questions like: “Could you tell me what you most valued in the last minister?” “What were the criticisms?” “How would you describe the leadership styles of the last three ministers?” “What are the controversial issues in this congregation?” Questions designed to learn the congregation’s history are a place to start an important task of the first year or two of a new call: discerning as much as possible about the congregation’s communication patterns, history of over-functioning and under-functioning between clergy and lay, projection and scapegoating of the pastor, and so on. Chronic Anxiety While triangles, scapegoating, and projection are always happening in any emotional system, they are heightened during times of increased anxiety. If a family is going through a time of prolonged anxiety and stress, symptoms will appear. In the case of a family, these symptoms may emerge as heightened marital conflict where each spouse externalizes his or her anxiety into the marital relationship and each focuses on what is wrong with the other, losing self-focus. Congregations also exhibit increased symptoms when anxiety increases. Bowen’s axiom is: the greater the level of anxiety, the more primitive the functioning of members. There are two types of anxiety: acute and chronic. Acute anxiety is a response to a particular crisis. Typically an acute crisis (job loss, health crisis, divorce) creates a spike of anxiety that is significant but relatively short-lived. If the individual (or family) is healthy and receives good support, he or she typically will recover over time, returning to his or her baseline of health. Chronic anxiety, however, is different. Chronic anxiety results from a cluster of stressors over such a lengthy period of time that the healthy baseline disappears. Over time, everyday anxiety becomes normal, even though it might be impacting both physical health (blood pressure, gastrointestinal problems, headaches, etc.) and mental health (depression, addiction, etc.). The state of chronic anxiety becomes the baseline. In times of chronic anxiety, functioning becomes more reactive and primitive. Self-focus and self-awareness decrease, projection and blame increase, and emotional reactivity also increases. During periods of chronic anxiety in a marriage, one spouse may give up more self in a reactive effort to stabilize the marriage or family and decrease the anxiety, over-functioning in an attempt to shore up the relationship. Consider what happens in an alcoholic family: the non-drinking spouse tries to manage the problem drinker’s life. She or he hides the alcohol, calls the workplace with excuses, and takes on most of the responsibility for the children. Over-functioning is a response driven by chronic anxiety. However, over time, the spouse that gives up more self as an anxious response to the crisis in the family becomes symptomatic with either mental-health or physical-health issues. So even if the alcoholic eventually gets help, the partner often ends up symptomatic and depressed. In much the same way, the spouse of a person with a terminal illness over-functions by necessity, giving up much self to care for the other. After the funeral, however, they are often left depressed, depleted, and exhausted in a way that goes beyond normal grief. And of course, during these times of chronic anxiety, one does not choose a response rationally but rather responds reactively, driven by an attempt to create stability. In some families, during these times of chronic anxiety, the anxiety is projected onto one of the children. The projection can be that of idealization (the perfect child) or the opposite (the problem child). Either projection shifts a great deal of anxiety onto the child, who can easily become symptomatic, not surprisingly, often presenting with anxiety disorders. When this happens, the anxiety in the family system is temporarily decreased, and the family can put all their focus on the child—thereby creating a new homeostasis. The Parish Family and Chronic Anxiety If reactive patterns happen so easily in a nuclear family, imagine how powerfully reactivity occurs in a church family. Many congregations in mainline Christianity are dealing with chronic anxiety and fear for their very survival. At the same time, they are not even aware that their reactivity is driven by chronic anxiety. They forget to look at the larger crisis in the mainline church or in their communities and default to projecting their anxiety onto something more concrete. Bowen theorizes that anxiety must be “bound” somewhere. Like a nuclear family, there are a number of possibilities within a parish on which to project the anxiety: the minister is the most obvious victim. In the end, understanding how parish systems respond to chronic anxiety offers us another way to view the complexity of setting boundaries. While clergy can go through endless boundary-awareness training and prepare to set healthy boundaries, they are in the end attempting to do so in the midst of anxious parish systems that may resent those boundaries and work even work harder to block healthy boundaries from being implemented. Systems theory stops us from blaming the parish or the minister as the “bad guy” in an anxious system looking for a simple fix. When anxiety increases, there is usually a commensurate increase in projection, triangles, and scapegoating, all of which make boundary setting difficult to achieve. Learning to set clear ground rules for communicating openly, and practicing these rules relentlessly, is an essential response in an anxious system. Differentiation We can easily feel overwhelmed when we realize how the emotional system operates in times of intense anxiety. Bowen’s concept of differentiation of self offers hope. Differentiation of self is the ability to contain our reactivity in the midst of anxiety, not become emotionally reactive, and stay connected to others in the midst of anxious times. Differentiation is “the ability to be in emotional contact with others yet still autonomous in one’s emotional functioning.” [6] It is the ability to maintain emotional objectivity while in the midst of an emotional system in turmoil. Too often people misunderstand this concept as a move toward being cutoff or independent. For example, someone may state their family is “crazy” and so as a result have little or nothing to do with them except during holidays and even then attempt to keep the conversation very much on the surface. For Bowen, avoidance is not differentiation, but instead, an emotional cutoff. True differentiation is the ability to go home, not become emotionally reactive, and attempt to maintain a one-to-one relationship with key members of the family. In Bowen-based therapy, the focus is on spending more time going home, for the purpose of building relationships, and learning to contain personal reactivity. Bowen-based therapy does not stop with learning to talk about our “dysfunctional families” with our therapists, which can be another type of triangle, but challenges clients to figure out how to go home and be with our families in a nonreactive way. In a similar way, clergy must learn to nonreactively stay in relationship with a variety of people and groups in their congregations while staying true to themselves while doing it. Trying to keep everyone happy is not differentiation nor is avoiding or cutting off from unpleasant people. Differentiation is the ability to lead, set clear boundaries, say “no” when necessary, while at the same time building intimate relationships—even with those with whom we disagree. It is the ability to be clear about one’s gifts and abilities and set priorities to implement those gifts in a way that moves toward pastoral excellence. Trying to be all things to all people while keeping everyone happy is the path to mediocrity and the antithesis of differentiation. For clergy to be able to set boundaries effectively and move toward more creative ministry, they must develop significant differentiation levels. Understanding the congregation as an anxious, emotional system and how that emotional system impacts leadership is a necessary first step in moving toward self-differentiation. How to begin moving toward increased levels of differentiated leadership will be addressed in chapter 5. Practice Identify the issues that are contributing to anxiety in your congregation and community and whether the anxiety is acute or chronic. Identify some of the (most likely) unconscious ways the congregation responds: Who do they scapegoat? What cutoffs are happening? What triangles have been created to cope with the anxiety and stabilize the emotional system? Identify one professional or personal situation and explore in depth: What issues are you most anxious about? Where do you notice yourself becoming most emotional and reactive? Are there situations and people you’ve scapegoated? Who have you pulled into triangles to decrease your anxiety? Who are you avoiding or cutting off? What would it be like for you to stop scapegoating? How would you do that? How could you reach out to connect with those who are cut off? How could you stop engaging in triangles? What helps you contain reactive behavior? Recalling chapter 2, what self-soothing practices might help you? 1. Ludwig von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory (New York: George Braziller, 1968). 2. Urie Bronfenbrenner, The Ecology of Human Development (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1979). 3. Michael E. Kerr and Murray Bowen, Family Evaluation: An Approach Based on Bowen Theory (New York: Norton, 1988). 4. Edwin H. Friedman, Generation to Generation: Family Process in Church and Synagogue (New York: Guilford, 1985); Edwin H. Friedman, A Failure of Nerve: Leadership in the Age of the Quick Fix (New York: Seabury Books, 1999); Ronald W. Richardson, Creating a Healthier Church: Family Systems Theory, Leadership, and Congregational Life (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1996). 5. Kerr, Family Evaluation, 7. 6. Ibid.