Introduction Writing about boundaries—or how to set limits, both personally and professionally—is a daunting endeavor. The lack of professional boundaries among clergy whose misconduct has been splashed across national newspapers has inflicted horrific pain on the individuals affected and betrayed far too many congregations. But most clergy don’t engage in the notorious violations reported in the daily news. Though we may not realize it, we likely face more mundane boundary challenges every day, from being called to attend an emergency sickbed during our child’s music performance to the unspoken expectation that we attend every committee meeting. We may be worn down by the demands of ministry, disconnected from the source of energy that inspired our call and that nurtures our gifts. Could depletion and burnout also be caused by a lack of boundaries? This book discusses the ordinary boundary problems that are robbing too many clergy and congregations from life-giving ministry. Our hope is that the book will help readers move beyond generic suggestions for boundary setting, such as “take more time for yourself” or “request a sabbatical,” to a much deeper understanding of where boundary challenges come from, how we react to them, and how we can work with ourselves, our families, and our congregations to set boundaries that reinvigorate ministry. Chapter 1 provides an overview of the scope of the problem. Even though clergy sexual misconduct (CSM) is not the major concern of this book, reviewing the problem of CSM helps us understand the factors that lead to many types of boundary problems—and also how boundary training was initiated as a response to the egregious violations of clergy sexual misconduct. We believe a different type of boundary training that moves beyond sexual-misconduct problems could be more helpful to most clergy who struggle with quite ordinary and vexing dilemmas. In chapters 2, 3, and 4, we set the context for this different type of boundary training. Chapter 2 addresses the self-deficits clergy bring into ministry that can interfere with setting limits. The lens of self psychology, which helps us view our need for affirmation, offers one way to see the deficits that can interfere with setting appropriate limits. In chapter 3, we use another lens—Bowenian family-systems theory—to explore the resistance of the systems in which clergy operate and how systems impact our ability to set boundaries. Chapter 4 considers the interaction effect of the intrapersonal factors of clergy and the systemic factors in which we operate—and how that interaction effect makes setting boundaries even more complicated. With an understanding of obstacles that block our capacity to set limits, we can turn to the task of change. In chapter 5, we review recent discussions of “pastoral excellence” as we remember our call and what inspired us to enter the ministry. Then we turn to notions of self-differentiation and emotional intelligence for practical advice as we negotiate saying “no” to say “yes” to the life-giving practices that nurture pastoral excellence. How to Use This Book We wrote this book with the hope that it could be used in multiple ways. Individual clergy may read this book to deepen their understanding and practice in setting boundaries. We include practice sections at the end of chapters 1–4 and throughout chapter 5 to offer a springboard for reflection, discussion, and change. Professional facilitators may use the content of this book to teach boundary training for groups of clergy. Appendix 1 includes an outline that can be adapted for four- or eight-hour workshops. Workshop goals include presenting a comprehensive overview of boundary issues and introducing participants to the task of setting clear boundaries. But boundary-awareness trainings only allow time for an overview of some very complicated concepts. At the end of an eight-hour presentation, clergy have been challenged to think differently about boundaries. However, thinking about boundaries is quite different from implementing a different way of doing ministry. To fully implement these concepts as a step toward pastoral excellence, a far more intensive process is necessary. We are strong advocates of participating in facilitated clergy groups. We believe that the best way to integrate the concepts introduced in this book and workshops based on this material is to use the book in a clergy group where the concepts can be carefully explored, discussed, and implemented. The concepts presented in this book are both difficult and potentially life changing. Applying these concepts to our personal and professional lives with the support and challenge of an excellent clergy group can be tremendously helpful. Why are clergy groups so effective? A group with a structured curriculum and a trained facilitator provides a place where clergy feel safe and supported yet are challenged to learn and improve. Offering both support and challenge, clergy peer-learning groups could be an ideal format to consider the topic of boundaries as discussed in this book. Tips for how to start a clergy group are included in appendix 2. We wrote this book because of our own personal and professional experiences. We’ve learned about the personal wounds and family roles within ourselves and our families of origin that have made it difficult for us to set limits, and we’ve watched many clergy struggle with similar issues. Out of our personal experiences, our professional interest has grown: David has provided boundary-awareness workshops for over fifteen years across the New York and New England region. Nancy has led clergy consultation groups as well as an eight-year program funded by the Lilly Endowment focused on teaching Samaritan Counseling Center staff throughout the country how to offer care for clergy and congregations. Writing about boundaries is daunting—but learning to practice personal and professional limits in the setting of ministry may reinvigorate your life and the life of your congregation. We invite you to say “no” to say “yes” to the life-giving call of ministry.