INTRODUCTION 3 commitment to move into a deeper place of study and investment in the lineage. I remember clearly that we were standing face-to-face in front of the shoe cubby that always sits by the entrance of every yoga studio, and I was taking my shoes out of the cubby to leave. I had been absent for a few weeks, so she came up and gave me a hug, saying, “It’s so good to see you back. We have been missing you.” Feeling guilty for my absence, I said, “I know. Work has been so busy, but I wanted to tell you, I just bought my ticket to go see the Dalai Lama next week in Pennsylvania.” As I completed my sentence, I saw the furrowing of a distressed brow appear on her usually contemplative expression, and she replied, “We will actually be there too. We will be protesting him and his actions. Our tradition disagrees with his actions and engagement in politics. Be careful of his teachings.” Yes. The man who is an international symbol of peace. She was warning me about the Dalai Lama. I am pretty sure I smiled and nodded and said something that appeared like agreement. I stumbled out of the basement onto the chilly spring sidewalk of Hoboken. As her words settled into my brain, my internal response was something like, “Damn it!” That thought was quickly followed by, “Seriously? No. Not again.” I have since learned, in subsequent years, that the tradition my fairly innocent group of Buddhist, non-Buddhist yogi students were enamored with at the time, the New kadampa Tradition, seems to be a fairly aggressive and revolutionary group—outside of yoga studio basements in Hoboken. I read an article that went into detail about the tradition and its aggressive actions and for the first time in my life, I felt something akin to a trigger outside of my childhood religion. It was fascinating, but it showed me my church wounds were still fresh, and I was still extra sensitive to fundamentalism, even of a different color—saffron to be exact. So interestingly, the closest I ever came to a cult was in this seemingly benign lecture and practice series in a New York metro-area yoga studio. The irony abounds. This is not meant to point a negative lens at Buddhism. This experience left me open enough to return to explore my tradition anew, and most importantly, to begin to forgive. This started would bring me full circle and back to the Christian contemplative practices and teachers of my roots. What I found is that no religion is immune