WISDOM TEACHERS VERSUS FALSE GURUS 95 Once the small crowd dissipated, I went up to ask my question. “Excuse me. I am staying for the Yoga Nidra. Do I need to sign in again for the next session?” He looked at me uncomfortably long, moved into my personal space and gazed in his unblinking fashion and said, “Did you see during class that moment? We locked eyes and in the breath, we had that moment. Did you feel it?” Inner Ick! My question was matter of fact and simple. I gave no inclination with my body language or verbal language that I was seeking anything else, but there he was running his game on me. With my skin crawling, I replied, “Sure. So do I need to sign in again?” He touched my arm and said, “It was really a powerful moment… No, you don’t have to sign in. Get comfortable for the meditation. It is a spiritually powerful experience. People who have done my Yoga Nidra have had some of their greatest dreams and visions come true.” To which my inner reply was a sardonic, “Ok.” My outer reply was to move my mat into the back, grit my teeth, and try to get through this investigative meditation—at this point I wanted to see how far his dysfunctional false guru nature went. He did not disappoint. His meditation was full of all kinds of platitudes, promises, and allure—just enough to rope in anyone who was wounded or seeking who hadn’t seen his kind before. He promised people great things from his meditation—wish-fulfillment spirituality, which in any tradition is the most superficial and disappointing kind. I hate being right about those kinds of people in my midst—but I was about him. He was a false guru to the core, and he still teaches and runs his own studio. This is terrifying. I do my best, in my community and elsewhere, to teach people about the nature of a false guru—so that fewer people are likely to fall for this kind of carnival trickery and smoke-and-mirrors faith. For those of you outside of this particular spiritual community or culture, you can insert any abusive leaders you have encountered— they are the same in certain traits. They just wear different clothing and outfits of convincing, but they are all innately and alarmingly similar. They also know how to find those who are the most seeking and use their vulnerability and spiritual aspiration against them, for their own purposes.