CHAPTER 6 Peeling the Onion Religious Injury Subtypes Humility…is nothing else but a true knowledge and experience of yourself as you are. — The Cloud of Unknowing This topic of religious wounds and church-hurt has been percolating as an increasingly louder conversation for at least the better part of 10 years, although the last five have been when I have seen major changes in the form of dialogue about it. There are more Facebook groups, support groups, and personal stories being shared in the wider virtual and literal public squares in and out of faith contexts than ever before. However, since the concept is very new as an area of study, and definitely has had minimal assessment and treatment within the wider field of traumatology, it seems appropriate to break down the varieties of religious trauma to different types of abuse and traumatic experience. This categorization, much like this book as a whole, is a means to speak into the pain with a few tangible concepts, so that those who have been hurt can feel heard and validated, so those who hope to support them personally or as a clinical provider can understand this trauma better, and perhaps the loftiest aspiration, so those in faith communities can understand why many people have left faith communities and find ways to nurture rather than retraumatize survivors of religious trauma. To change something, we must first understand what it is and where it lies inside both our society and ourselves. A few additional 102 PEELING THE ONION 103 terms will be explored in this chapter. including internalized oppression, attachment issues as they related to religious abuses, and other relevant areas of discussion. We will also explore a number of situations and people groups where historic and pervasive abuse and neglect have occurred in religious contexts. Does this mean every religious context contains these abuses? No. In taking on the task to write this book and still exist within both secular clinical and faith-based contexts, I have found a strange double bind. People untrusting of religion have a hard time believing I don’t have a proselytizing ulterior motive (mistrust is often, understandably, a symptom of the pain of trauma), and many religious folks have seen me as some kind of fraudulent interloper, there to prove that religion is bad. While neither are true, I would say it has tested my ability to hold the tension between two widely separated spaces and hurt places, as well as hold my own historical religious prickly places in check—and remember that on either side of trauma and misunderstanding there is fear and self-protection inherent to how we hold ourselves and our psyches together. I do it. We all do it. I knew moving into this project that I would face my own religious history of hurts, and I would have to face those on both sides of this experience who would question my motives. But this is my only goal: I want to bring religious wounds and church-hurt out of the darkness of shame and silence and into the light so we can all see how we might validate this trauma—religiously, psychologically, and secularly—and find a way to move beyond hurt and pain into something transformed as people and as communities. I hope this preliminary review of trauma in religious contexts will help manifest such a dialogue. Sexual and Physical Abuse Sexual and physical abuse, primarily by religious leaders, is the most well-known form of trauma in a religious context. There can be many ways that an oppressive system can collaborate with abuses that happen under their roof, by silence, denial, or self-preserving untruths. Before we get into those specifics, I want to clarify a point I often see misinterpreted or misunderstood. Something I have seen consistently assumed, most prominently related to the Catholic Church when a scandal occurs or a clergy sexual predator is discovered, is that priests are somehow more dominant sexual predators than any other people group, or that all 104 SACREd WOundS priests have an inherent dysfunctional and abusive behavior. I can understand, outside of a trauma-based perspective, how this could be an immediate assumption—based on the number and prominence of these cases uncovered in the last decade or so. I have seen similar conclusions jumped to when I would discuss my work with survivors of military sexual trauma—first, it would be assumed that all the victims were female, and second, that the kind of people and training that occurs in a military context creates sexual predators. Neither was inherently true, and the same should be understood for predators in religious contexts or by clergypersons. To understand the nature of sexual predators in systems of power, namely in religion, it is important to see what is true and what is myth/ We have to see clearly without assumptions or misgivings, before we can even begin to heal as persons and communities. Power-seeking predators (sexual or otherwise) look for places where their predatory nature will be most easily disguised and least likely discovered. Any system built on a hierarchical structure, where there are roles of power or authority, will be places sought out by predators—but this is much different than saying all people who end up in systems or positions of power and authority are or will be predators—sexually, physically, or emotionally. The difficulty is that predators are clever and know they thrive best in systems that are structured to protect power and give victims little room for recourse. This is why we see abuses such as these in places like religion and the military—the nature of the structure is inherently protective of the person(s) with more power. This is the dynamic we need to be careful of and critique, not necessarily just the roles of authority in and of themselves, but to make sure we find ways to create more transparency in those structures for the safety of all involved. If we were to compare religion and the military, we can actually find a number of corollaries between them as systems of power and authority. Due to recent scandals and focus on sexual assault in the military, it is doing a better job at transparency and creating an external system of checks and balances when there is abuse in the ranks. Far from perfect, the military may be a few steps ahead of the religious systems in creating methods to correct this systemic shield that was once in place to (intentionally or no)t protect the predator rather than the victims. If we can be clear from the start that all people in positions of power are not inherently abusers or sexual predators, then we can PEELING THE ONION 105 then dig deeper to see the systemic issues that can protect predators in systems—specifically religious systems. Sexual and physical abuse in a religious context can be very damaging, and because of a systemic hierarchy, combined with the authority of God as the “boss” of those people in power, the control a predator in religion has over those they victimize is immense— even more than in most systems. The correlating shame and silencing imposed on the victim is multiplied because there is a system of power (purportedly) led by God, which is facilitating this abuse. The perpetrators in religious systems are very clever and make sure those they are abusing believe they have no recourse or self-esteem to speak up. It is a cruel brutalization at all levels and impacts everything from a person’s sense of worthiness, lovability, “sinfulness” or goodness, and can make it feel like there is no way out. To exit such an experience in a religious system takes a lot of courage—and it is equally understandable why so many people remain stuck in those abusive situations. Hopefully, the more people speak out about this issue, and the more voices that are heard (anonymously or not), the easier it will become for people to exit these abusive systems. Sometimes the abuser is the “leader” of a household, sometimes they are a “leader” in the church structure, and often they are both. If you have been abused physically and sexually in a religious community, it is not your fault. You didn’t ask for or deserve it or any other negative statement or belief your abuser wants you to believe. There are places to escape and sources of help—domestic violence shelters, child protective agencies, therapists and crisis providers outside the community system. You do not deserve any abuse you ever received. You should know that before all else whether you are in or outside of an abuse situation. You did not deserve it. You are inherently good. You can heal from this pain—although in the worst moments it is hard to believe. LIFE PARABLES DEB: I will start with one that has plagued me my whole life. My brother’s godfather was a deacon in our church. His wife was also our caretaker after school and on the weekends because my mother had to work extra hours to make up for my father’s irresponsible spending. While I was at their house, I was sexually abused by this man and his son on separate occasions. I don’t know if the one knew the other 106 SACREd WOundS was doing it, and his son was probably about 12 when it started. My first memory of it was when I was three years old. I know I was three because my brother was still in a carrier, and I was three when he was born. The abuse may or may not have occurred in the church. My memory is fuzzy on that, and I am undergoing Eye Movement Desensitization and Rreprocessing (EMDR) therapy to remedy that. The abuse continued until 1994, when we moved to Florida. I told my mother a few months later, and she informed the Assemblies of God, who did nothing but remove him as a deacon. At age 17, I confronted him in the church when I was sent back to Connecticut on vacation/punishment to be with my grandmother for the summer. The meeting was between the two abusers, the pastor of the church at the time, who happened to be my mother’s ex-boyfriend, my grandmother, and my uncle. The abusers vehemently denied any wrongdoing, and I spent the time being so angry at them while others watched and did nothing. Other experiences included seeing my mother being stripped of her singing privileges after an affair she had with another man. This happened even though I knew that my father had many girlfriends yet was still able to play in the band. My mother’s beautiful voice was taken away from the congregation. My father was also very physically abusive, and after EMDR therapy, I have finally determined that he was also sexually abusive also. I remember going to my aunt with this accusation. She is a minister and always told me I was probably mistaking my father for the other abusers, and it was just a dream. I just found out several months ago that it was not, in fact, a dream. KISHA: I experienced trauma at the hands of a couple of my female mentors who sexually abused me. They were mentors whom I met at church who were supposedly intended to be some sort of spiritual guides and/or extended family members to me. During that time up until approximately a year-and-a-half ago, I carried around deep shame, confusion, insecurity, and inappropriate guilt regarding my sexuality. For many years, I wasn’t exactly sure who I was, what I wanted sexually, nor what was ok for me to want. I was confused about the identity of Jesus, because my faith tradition is a “Oneness” tradition that always combined the identities of both God and Jesus as one in the same. Therefore, I thought they both hated me in unison. My view of Heaven was merely that it was a place that I would PEELING THE ONION 107 probably never see. I believed that if I were to see it, I would first have to stand in line naked waiting to be judged on Judgment Day. I worried that everybody in line would see my naked body, and that even in Heaven, I would have to go around naked with no clothes, no privacy, and no boundaries. I was deeply ashamed of my body. Secondary Traumatic Stress (from religious abuse) We discussed secondary stress a bit earlier and defined it as stress that comes from someone in relationship with persons who have been abused or those who hear the accounts of abuse. This is an exhausting role and one not often seen or recognized as such. Recently, with the burgeoning use of virtual networks and social media, I am seeing this happen virtually as well. People or community groups built to support survivors of religious injury or abuse are becoming overwhelmed with the sheer number of stories coming into these virtual spaces from facilitators of these intended safe web spaces and other community members. People are getting fried on hearing others’ hurt. This doesn’t mean we shouldn’t confide in loved ones, care providers, or virtual communities, but it does mean that if you are someone absorbing the experiences of others’ trauma, you have to be aware this can impact your own well-being. A brief example comes from my early experience as a therapist intern with combat veterans. I had my own history of trauma and my own PTSD healing when I landed my first graduate internship. I felt that although the experiences of my clients were traumatic, they were so far away from anything I could relate to that the likelihood of it impacting me was slim. Slowly, in a way I didn’t even see at first by hearing trauma accounts all day, I began absorbing the content and emotional dimensions of their stories, and they became a part of me. I began experiencing symptoms that had nothing to do with my own traumatic experience but were related to my clients’ trauma. I would swerve when I saw garbage on the side of the road—a typical combat trauma response of Iraq veterans due to the number of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in the combat zone. I would wake up from night terrors full of bullets flying and explosions—where I would be injured in the middle of a combat zone. I began appropriating an exaggerated startle response, especially when people came up behind me—something I had all but rid myself of in my own trauma recovery. It was a few weeks into this before I saw the connection—I was manifesting the symptoms 108 SACREd WOundS of PTSD for the combat veterans who were my therapy clients. Since then I have learned to curate boundaries that diminish the likelihood of that happening—but there is always the random occasion, over the years, where a particular story or experience will linger with me. So if you are a loved one, community member, or helping professional seeking to support those who have experienced trauma in a religious context, know that self-care and boundaries are as important for you as for the survivor. The way you help people best is by taking care of yourself enough to have the stamina for the long haul. This is a form of traumatization and, at some point, it can be helpful to get your own support system, support group, and/or therapy provider to help you address your own traumatic experience. This kind of traumatic experience can often lead to the issues mentioned above—appropriate the symptoms of another person, as well as issues of anxiety, anger, or general emotional overwhelmingness. Depending on how overwhelming it is, it can commonly be moderated by emotional numbing to desensitize the self from the pain of others. Gender Identity Negation The use of religious texts to validate one set of people and negate another is something religious traditions in their worst forms have been doing forever. Being a woman in a great many versions of religious traditions can be varying shades of a negative personal trait. It can limit what you can do in a religious community and culture, if you are allowed to talk and what you are allowed to say or are considered capable of saying. Your station can be low and limited in a way that much of contemporary society might consider gender dynamics of the 1800s. This is seen again as a theme in issues of historic abuse and colonization, sexual identity negation, and more. If we go back to the inherent dynamics of power and privilege in hierarchies, we can see abuses of some by others pursuing power. Selecting a “lesser” gender, or at the very least a passive and silent gender, is one way to rule out any fight for power from about half of any community group. Even though it may not feel healthy or right, even when women leave communities that devalue them just for being a woman, it is hard to get rid of the inherent “not enough” feeling percolating deep inside. It also makes it difficult for women to claim all manner of their lives and selfhood—including their bodies, sexuality, strengths, and PEELING THE ONION 109 abilities. It is a sort of brainwashing and programming, happening through the childhood growth and development cycles into adulthood, and becomes very ingrained. Even when a woman can leave that belief system and begin to gain some sense of autonomy, it takes time and work to deprogram her own inwardly driven sense of being less than a man. This version of traumatic experience can lead to issues of anxiety, shame/guilt, anger (often self-inflicted both emotionally and possibly physically through cutting or eating disorders), and grief and loss. This is not all, but these are some common manifestations. The anger is usually inwardly driven at first due to the learned behavior of not letting opinions, feelings, and selfhood be expressed externally from the faith tradition that negated them. LIFE PARABLE: Kisha In addition to carrying deep trauma and shame surrounding my sexuality, I also carried shame regarding my gender. I come from a very musical family. I also come from a very Levitical family. In spite of my gifts for singing, playing instruments, and preaching, I was never encouraged, trained, or allowed to use any of them in the church because those opportunities were only given to boys. There existed a glass ceiling for girls and women within the church that was rarely ever spoken about, but always implied and definitely understood. For the few women who were somehow granted opportunities for leadership within the church, there was so much competition that many of them ended up leaving the church and starting their own ministries elsewhere. Meanwhile I was left stuck with no motivation to practice, sharpen, or appreciate my ministry gifts. I saw no point. They would never be valuable anyway. Sexual Identity Negation Sexual identity negation is another powerfully painful way unhealthy or abusive religious communities and religious doctrine can negate and devalue a person based on who they are as a human being. Due to the extreme doctrinal statements about being LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered, queer) by many extreme forms of many religions, it can also be physically dangerous to be openly LGBTQ in certain communities. There are many people in these traditions who live closeted and in fear as a means of self-preservation. The 110 SACREd WOundS alternative could mean losing family, friends, and entire community group indefinitely if not permanently. That is a lot to give up, so many still function in these communities as much or as long as they can. There is no wrong choice in these situations—each one is difficult. If people stay closeted in a community, they lose access to an intrinsic part of who they are; if they leave, then they may lose everyone they have ever known and loved. The difficulty unique to LGBTQ people in abusive faith cultures, different from gender issues, is that who the person is while in that community is a secret. A woman is a woman, and that is a visible fact—even when it is diminished or abused by the community, her gender is open. For someone who is LGBTQ, the love of their family and community can feel especially fragile and conditional—they know that if they come out, that love can be rescinded, and their nature touted as wrong or sinful. If you are not LGBTQ, imagine for a moment that who you are is considered a sin—as you are when you were born, as you are when you die. Imagine for a moment that your very life was considered sinful—that is an excruciating thing to bear. It is no wonder that LGBTQ persons, if they leave their faith tradition, can find it difficult to ever return to another faith community—fearing the possible lack of acceptance they experienced in their faith of origin. Some of the common issues from religious trauma experienced by LGBTQ persons are shame/guilt built in from a negating religious community, anxiety, isolation, and trust/intimacy issues due to fear of rejection. LIFE PARABLE: Marg At 16 years old, I had come to realize I was a lesbian. My best friend from church and I had fallen in love with each other. Our love felt so pure, so tender, and so holy that I knew being gay was not a bad thing. But it was 1979, and you couldn’t be gay and Christian both. Yet, there we were. One day, when I was 18, I told the current youth minister at church that I was gay. I don’t know why I thought nothing would change. Maybe because it was I, and it was my church, I had grown up there, and I was safe there. But I was wrong. I misread him, and I misunderstood the times. The first thing he said was, “Well, you won’t be able to work with the children anymore.” I had been working with the younger kids for 10 years, more than half my life, likely longer than he had. At first I was stunned. But then an awful PEELING THE ONION 111 realization came over me. Uttering two words, “I’m gay,” had twisted my reality on its axis. The minister would never trust me again. I had changed. In five seconds I had become a sexual offender, a sinner going to hell. Church was no longer safe for someone like me. Soon after that day, I left. I left the building, the people, the music, and the memories. I left what I thought would be the setting for the rest of my life. I left. LIFE PARABLE: Tim …So I developed my faith and sexuality along the lines of what I’d been told since there weren’t any alternatives presented. For some reason, it was quite easy to “control myself” around girls, but I ended up getting crushes and dated a few times. I was genuinely attracted to a number of my female friends. But the sex drive I’d been warned about seemed easy, or at least possible, to control around women. (In hindsight, this was probably a result of training, morals, and inexperience. And perhaps having other options! One good thing: it kept me out of trouble...) But I also experienced crushes and “uncontrollable” feelings for the occasional guy. I then ended up in situations in which I was curious, and things went further than I expected. Ironically, the church training about “keeping safe” around women left me woefully unprepared for navigating these experiences. So there was no one I could talk to, and I felt terribly guilty. I had no role models for healthy homosexual relationships, and people I trusted handled it very badly. So I felt increasingly guilty, and because of that guilt, kept Jesus a long way away from that part of my life. Then I discovered Internet pornography, and it was obvious that I was interested in homosexual pornography. I felt excruciatingly guilty, but, in hindsight, it was mainly driven by curiosity about a world I had never experienced, that I didn’t even have words for, yet was somehow a part of me. It was an outlet for feelings I couldn’t talk about, or even name. So in my public persona, I was straight by default. There just weren’t any other viable options socially, intellectually, or “biblically“. But in private, I was trying to work out how to navigate a world where I had homosexual desires, and I was trying to hide that fact from myself and suppress those desires. I used to feel Jesus could never love me while I continued to make serious errors, whether I wanted to do these things, or whether I avoided them. (Yes, I had an internal 112 SACREd WOundS hierarchy of sins.) In particular, I felt that Jesus could never love me while I was attracted to men (among many things not ideal, perfect, and complete in my life.) This led me to feel fear, guilt, and rejection at my core. I could certainly never accept myself in this situation, and I could never entirely be at peace, whatever I told myself about God’s love. The condemnation of particular aspects of my life was much clearer than Jesus’ love for everyone, whatever their circumstances. While there was obvious pressure to change and conform, I did not feel accepted by Jesus, let alone the church. I had also tried very hard to change my sexual orientation over that decade. I’d had several attempts at counseling, online courses, prayer, behavioral modification, confession, spiritual warfare, and almost anything else I could think of. But nothing worked, at least not for more than a year, or so, at a time. It just made it that much harder to process my sexual orientation, as I am not just bisexual, but fluid in my degree of attraction to masculinity and femininity. It was that fluidity that confused the issue, because I would seem to go straight for a while, but it would never last. And I hated tying the success of my faith to my feelings for men. I didn’t even have a functional concept of bisexuality until the last few years. Before that, it just wasn’t something I could imagine myself being: I had always thought of myself as a straight guy with a “gay problem.” These weren’t the only issues I thought of during this time (I had a lot of thinking time). I struggled with how the church functioned for the physically disabled; the not stereotypically masculine “men”; the nonneurotypical (whether autistic or more broadly mentally differing); and, as I have already mentioned, the “not straight.” I struggled with my own experiences of each of these, and I felt trapped to hear that I had been part of what was considered to be negative characteristics: I become quite critical, bitter, angry, frustrated, and demanding. Intergenerational and Historic Trauma Intergenerational trauma is the traumatic experience that spans more than one generation or one lifetime and for which the impact compounds and grows through the generations. It is handed down in memories, in behaviors of elder generations, and possibly even, as we are learning more recently, in genetic code and DNA. Some examples of intergenerational trauma would be generations following Holocaust survivors, combat veterans, and in the cultural context, PEELING THE ONION 113 family lineage of marginalized or colonized community groups—most prominently seen in Native American communities but potentially any community with marginalized people or persons of color. The way this can manifest is multifaceted. When we are discussing issues of colonized or marginalized persons, this can express itself in a variety of social and dynamics, as well as with issues of internalized oppression. Internalized oppression happens when people appropriate a sense of internal self from outward cultural and social negatives about themselves and their people group. In many ways all the symptoms of trauma are internalized abuse—in the sense that the abusing system or person(s) provided a framework to devalue and abuse people in a religious context, and the symptoms are often an inward expression of that outward belief imposed on that person by the abusers. In some ways we can look at all religious trauma as a form of internalized oppression—even if it is not in the traditional way we look at oppression. Religious trauma is a form of oppression— oppressing people and their human traits, beliefs, and beyond—to build up the power and value of people at the top of a hierarchical system. Intergenerational trauma can express itself as repeating cycles of abuse and being abused, addiction and low self-worth, and potentially rage, anxiety, and guilt. It is especially profound for those who have felt mutually marginalized by society and by church/faith communities (as is discussed further in the racial and cultural trauma section below). …And Racial and Cultural Identity Trauma Racial and cultural identity trauma relates to intergenerational trauma when it is experienced among marginalized communities in the sense that it is the experience of being lesser than the dominant culture of the church system. This can be obviously or subtly felt. As Bill, articulates in his story, just the experience of having to show up to a church gathering where dress attire is expected can be a way to demean those who might not have the economic means to dress that way. Also insensitive discussions or actions around issues of race or cultural differences can be especially piercing. Even though intellectually we can say that church is made up of people and therefore will inherently include human mistakes and prejudices, we want to expect more of places that articulate a standard of caring for 114 SACREd WOundS one another, so it is especially painful when those communities let us down. This kind of trauma can lead to issues of shame and guilt, low self-esteem, anger, rage, and isolation. It can be hard for people who have been marginalized, such as in their church communities, to trust other community groups and personal relationships. It is important to validate this as real traumatic experience and to hold communities accountable to rectifying the margins as well as raising their own standards for how to care for others. LIFE PARABLE: Emma The intergenerational trauma for me with the Church was related to the overall culture of the community’s racism. When I was growing up, we kind of accepted the racism in my church and community. It was kind of weird. There was a lot of racism, but I didn’t understand just how much until I moved away from home and looked at other communities. In my small town it was blatant, in your face. You would feel you needed to dress up just to go shopping, whereas if you were Non-Native or not a person of color, you wouldn’t feel that need. I knew the feeling of someone following you around in a store. Moving away from my Native Church into a Non-Native church definitely tied into my beliefs of Christianity too. We didn’t have the church we were comfortable going to, and it was difficult after our warrior mascot protests with the Non-Native church in our town. After we had stood up in front of our school and town in protest of a Native American symbol as a mascot it went from just being a minority person to being someone who was unwanted by our community—including and especially our church. You could tell we were not welcome anymore. We got a scholarship from church when we were leaving high school and it felt like they were saying, “We are doing the right thing, but we don’t want to.” They gave us the scholarship because we were confirmed, and the Non-Native girl who applied for it was not. They made sure to let us know that was the only reason why we got it. This church alienation was surrounded by all of the cultural, racial, and intergenerational trauma issues. Back in my community in South Dakota, there are no resources, and they are just starting to get more with passing the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA). Before that, there wasn’t anything—you didn’t feel safe. Being a PEELING THE ONION 115 teenager growing up in a racist community where you know nothing will be done for any wrongdoing against you is very sad. In our town, if you go to court, there are only Native people there—that says a lot. With the trauma I have been through, our decision to protest the warrior mascot and the coronation ceremony for four years (doing what we thought was right) was a lot to take on. That same year we started protesting, I was sexually assaulted, and that erased entirely the ability to feel safe in my own town. During the protests, we had a lot of the people who came to help us—people connected to the Lakota Student Alliance and others connected with the American Indian Movement (AIM). They knew how dangerous the community was, but we didn’t. A lot of them had been through the Wounded knee Occupation as children, but we hadn’t. We were just trying to do the right thing. They came in to would warn us and say you need to smudge with sage (a Native protection practice) before you leave the house and when you come back. They were right because friends were warning us to not go to this party or to that school event because the community was planning to do something to us. One time they told us not to go to a bonfire—as cheerleaders we were supposed to be there—because the community members/students were going to stone us. My hope is that there are always people helping, so people can work on themselves enough to realize there are so many other people who are hurting too. I have seen that a lot in community. We are seeing there are so many people who need healing and don’t even realize it. Now that I understand more about my traumas, as well as intergenerational trauma and how trauma can get passed in the DNA, I understand myself much better. No wonder why my feelings are so overwhelming to me; they are related to my ancestors too. A lot of times now when things get overwhelming, I can see where it is coming from. Family (of Religious) Systems Trauma In therapy, we call the work with and issues of families “family systems” work. In families of unhealthy or abusive religion, as described in the previous family and trauma chapter, the unhealthy family system bleeds together with the unhealthy religious system to compound the impact on a person. As previously described, if the household “father” and the church “father” come together to injure, marginalize, or diminish a person, and state that this injury is actually 116 SACREd WOundS a mandate from the holy “father,” this is a very difficult system to unwind—it is triple the trauma and triple the hurt. It is hard enough to work through family traumatic experience with someone because it means dismantling everything they learned from their first breaths about love, themselves, and what it means to be safe (or unloved, invalid, and unsafe). When we are dealing with family trauma inside a faith system of trauma and you throw in the dysfunctional image of God created by both systems, it takes a lot of time and work to undo. It is not impossible, but the complexity of it means it takes time. LIFE PARABLE: David For me, I think the most disappointing thing all along is that I trusted people, so when my leaders or mentors (I was a pastor for many years), would disappoint or hurt me. that wounded me the most. I have this fantasy of what family should be, and because none of our families live up to the fantasy, we are always disappointed. Often it is the same with the church. We have a fantasy of what church professes and promises to be, and yet we experience the opposite. You entrust yourself to leaders or mentors, and if they hurt or betray you or do something shocking—that has been the most upsetting to me. In my childhood fantasy of what church could be, God looked exactly like my father. I still see an old man sitting on a throne in the clouds. I associated God with father. My dad was a strong disciplinarian, and I saw God that way—as strict. Jesus was more like a buddy, so I maintained my spiritual life through Jesus and by being obedient to God at the same time. I was afraid of father and didn’t want to make him angry so I was obedient, but inwardly screaming. LIFE PARABLE: Anonymous The saddest part of my experience is that I didn’t realize my spiritual experiences had created wounds until I was in my 40s. I was born into an evangelical, charismatic family whose religious affiliation was a group that was cult-like in their approach. In other words, the group believed in God, the Divinity, atonement of Jesus, the Resurrection, and ministry of the Holy Spirit... so far, so good (kind of). But then there were layers and sublayers. For example, “established churches,” as they called those groups who meet regularly in designated church buildings, were deceived and