96 SACREd WOundS unmasking the False Guru There are a number of quintessential characteristics and methodologies of the false guru. Whether this might help you in looking backward to those who hurt or abused you in a faith context, or in moving forward to isolate the characteristics to investigate in your own life experience, use this template (and build in your own discoveries) to see those leaders who use their role to build themselves up and keep others bound to them. This is similar to family codependency but sometimes even more dangerous because it binds you in relationship to them and keeps them as a conduit to your own spiritual path. 1. Certitude and Extreme Confidence: They are so sure of themselves and their version of teachings, and their brand of wisdom. They question almost nothing about themselves, their lives, or their beliefs. If there is any humility, it is often loud and dramatic—all about the pomp and show of it, the kind of show put on by someone who doesn’t understand the definition of actual humility. 2. Charisma and Charm overdose: They are super suave, well dressed (in whatever that looks like for their tradition), and so alluring. Their smile, stare, and smoothness of speech is almost hypnotically alluring—and the more vulnerable you are, the more you are prey to this kind of allure. 3. Promises and Wish Fulfillment: Their brand of spirituality, religion, or dogma is going to get you everything you want— no more pain, loss, or poverty (literal or emotional). All your dreams will come true—and if they don’t, it means you are doing something wrong, not them. You aren’t true enough in your belief—that is what they will tell you. 4. The Golden Ticket Rule: Like Willy Wonka—they have the golden ticket to your happiness, afterlife, and spiritual journey, and there is a limited supply. But conjoint with the wish fulfillment, if you stick with them, they can help you attain it. 5. The Price Tag: This is not true of all false gurus, but often there is a hefty price tag for their brand of enlightenment or exclusive members-only afterlife. If it costs a lot to get to Nirvana, then it probably isn’t Nirvana.