INSIDE THE ANIMAL 57 like poor Linus was meant to do (if he hadn’t stayed an eternal child), we create a sense of safety that doesn’t require the transitional object. The visualization is a version of a transitional object, as described in some of the tips to deal with stress. You may want to carry a physical object that reminds you to calm down and find that internal safe space—like a coin, rock, or something small enough but with enough heft to hold onto. The physical object can remind you to use your breath or access our internal safe space when you need it. Over time, you can work toward not needing the physical or visual object as much—and being able to feel the inward-oriented safety in life as a whole. 1. Begin with finding a safe and quiet place to practice the safe space visualization. Get comfortable—whether that is seated in the chair, on the floor, or lying down. 2. Close your eyes, or if that isn’t comfortable, find a fixed point on the ground to look at that won’t bring any outside distractions in on your practice. 3. Begin with your slow and steady breath to slow you down and ground you. Focus on your slow and steady breathing as long as you need to until you feel ready to move to the next phase of this practice. 4. Imagine a safe place—if you have a reference point of a real place in your life where once you felt safe, go there if it is comfortable. If you don’t have any real safe place in your memory, imagine a place you have always wanted to go or your ideal environment— for some that might be a beach, for others, the mountains. For some it might be inside and others in nature. Find your selected space and visualize it. 5. As you visualize your safe space location begin to look around— notice the environment. What are the sounds, scents, and sights in that space? Add objects or elements into the environment that remind you of safety—maybe the warmth of a fire, the sound of birds singing, or the feeling of sitting on a cozy blanket. Whatever makes the space safer and more comfortable, add those elements into your safe place. 6. Take your time becoming familiar with your safe space—until everything about the space is vivid in your mind. Remember that