ACkNOWLEDGMENTS This book is first and foremost for all the voices—the voices of the hurt, the unheard, the invalidated, and the discarded. It is for the forgotten, the neglected, and the negated souls who have been given a false myth of a vengeful God-face and a hateful or vengeful manifestation of divinity. It is for everyone who has survived these experiences, and for those voices in this book of those brave enough to vocalize their suffering for the sake of offering others a resonant story and a hopeful future. I want to pay homage to those voices. Thank you to everyone who has been brave enough to live his or her own story of suffering and survive it. Thank you to all those persons whose stories populate this book, and the many, many more whose brave stories of hope populate the world—standing in opposition to hate, neglect, and diminishment. Thank you for living your story, for surviving, and, when you can, thriving despite the negative myths of faith. I want to also thank those wisdom teachers I have found in my own life who have informed my own spiritual journey and sacred wounds healing—and offered me tools and resources to light my own path and help me hold that light up for others. Specifically, a deep thank you to the master teachers of the Living School for Action and Contemplation, including the founder Fr. Richard Rohr (also the generous writer of the foreword for this book), Dr. James Finley, and Rev. Cynthia Bourgeualt. They are mystic wisdom teachers and I am grateful for the years of study at their feet and the lifetime’s worth of teachings I have yet to unpack from their knowledge on spirituality, the mystic path, and healing. Thank you to all those who helped bring this book into being— from those who had late-night conversations with me about the xiv ACkNOWLEDGMENTS xv content to those adept hands who helped bring the book into being, from editorial support and investment to cover design and publication. Especially thank you to the wonderful team at Chalice Press—namely Steve knight, Brad Lyons, Gail Stobaugh, and Mick Silva—who walked through the process of bringing Sacred Wounds to life, each and every step of the way. Thank you to my friends and family who have been amazing supporters, readers, and morale boosters during the late-night writing and editing sessions. Especially thanks to my mother, Patricia Bennett (always my editor-in-chief), and my husband, Christopher Pasquale, who is able to motivate my writing and my life like a shot of espresso whenever I need it, and even more so when I don’t know that I need it. Additionally, I send an immense thank you to my soul sister, Holly Roach, who championing this book before it was even a book, and has been one of the greatest advocates for the Sacred Wounds work. Finally, thank you to my soul mother, Teresa of Avila, who has been the voice in my head that I needed, when I wanted to listen and when I didn’t. She walks with me every step of the way, each and every day, and I am forever grateful for her inspiration.