INSIDE THE ANIMAL 35 finally beginning to understand what they wanted, and like a good captive, she gave it to them in hopes of some clemency. Days that felt like months into this spiritual waterboarding she walked up to one of her counselors and said, “You know, I have been thinking about it, and I decided I want to accept Jesus as my personal Lord and Savior.” She was greeted with a strong hug and a communal showering of praise. “Do you think I might be able to call my mom? I’d really like to tell her.” Clever girl. My friend was no dummy. The second the counselor handed her the phone, she began feverishly dialing the numbers to her anticipated freedom. When she heard her mother’s voice, she started shouting into the phone, “Mom, please come get me! Get me out of here!” The counselor grabbed the phone away from her, and a few other camp staff began pulling her out of the room. Her counselor got on the phone and told her mother how she had been misbehaving in camp and had become out of control. They told her mother not to believe what she was saying. Protective and insightful to the sound of fear in her own child, her mother went into a rage: “You listen to me: My daughter is to be put in a private room, and neither you nor any of the staff at your camp are to talk to her at all! I will be retrieving my daughter immediately and will get there by morning. You keep away from her!” The stammering counselor agreed, not that my friend’s mother could hear her. But it didn’t matter: Help was on its way. A long 10 hours later, my friend’s mother arrived, with a trunk full of candy (contraband at the camp) to heal my friend’s wounds, and as a “screw you” to the camp staff, she began handing out bagsful to any kid with an outstretched hand. While hungry-eyed children pillaged the trunk, and my friend sat consoled and surrounded by her sisters who had come along on the rescue mission, her mother made sure all of the camp administration got a good helping of in-person yelling, replete with many a creatively strung expletive that surely made them blush. My friend made it out, and due to her mother’s emotional stamina and a good helping of both her parents’ smarts, today she is a strong and determined woman, although I think it is no big leap to