THE LOTUS AND THE MUD 141 As a chaplain I will have an alternative route for which I can care for people spiritually. Instead of being pressured to be “on” all the time, or to conform to the bullshit laced within church culture, I can merely go straight to the source, meet people where they are, and be a present help in the midst of their darkness. That is what I am excited about—presence, not performance. In the meantime, I practice community with the local spoken word and open microphone artists in my area. I have learned there are some very common threads that run deep among poets, prophets, and preachers. Therefore, I make it my business to commune with such folks at least once or twice weekly. My loyalty to church attendance is not as significant. However, when there is something of interest happening at church, such as a book study I’m interested in, I attend. The United Methodist Church denomination seems to be a safe space for me during this particular season of my life. Rage and Reconciliation: Reconciling on the Healing Journey Martin Luther king, Jr., once said, “Hate cannot drive out hate, only love can do that.” This quote has been repeated over and over, yet our personal and cultural history seems to reflect hate trying to beget love, freedom, and hope. It never can, and it never has. This does not mean we obliterate necessary justice, but it means that for it to have any transformative power, that justice must be wrapped in inner and outer movements of reconciliation. Without reconciliation, rage is just the leftover matter of hate and abuse. We cannot create a life on just the hate of the wrong; we must build on the praxis of the good. As a trauma therapist and survivor, I have personally and professionally spent much of my life mired in the sewage of abuses. This, however, is not the only thing that can come from trauma— we all have the potential to transform hate into love. Many times, though, we get stuck in the sludge of the hurt and get so entrenched that we can’t find our way out to healing. I run an intensive outpatient and outpatient program in Southeast Florida for survivors of trauma and addiction. In the program are three things I have found inherent to healing: creative expression, spiritual and embodied practices, and relational experience. To articulate the depths of sewage we can get mired in, I show my clients a clip from Shawshank Redemption. This is one of my all-time favorite movies.