CHAPTER 9 The Voices Out of Darkness Messages from Survivors to Survivors and Faith Communities He who sees all beings in his Self and his Self in all beings, he never suffers; because when he sees all creatures within his true Self, then jealousy, grief, and hatred vanish. — The Upanishads The voices of hurt and healing are powerful. This is the reason that woven throughout this book are the voices of those hurt and of some who have found healing on the other side of religious injury. I can think of no more effective way to provide support for those suffering from this kind of traumatic experience or anyone else more equipped to speak to those in faith traditions. This does not necessarily mean faith traditions with overt injury to their community members but includes those who wish to do faith better and serve those who have been wounded, rather than discount them as frivolous, superficial, or without deep spirituality. As much as I have met those who have left faith traditions seeking the solace of other voices, I have also met those inside traditions trying to create a safe and healthy community but who don’t have the tools to know how to provide a nurturing environment for wounded souls and hurt hearts. This section of the book speaks out loud from the voices of those who have been wounded to those who are suffering sacred wounds. Then, in turn, it speaks to those in faith communities wishing to understand and 155 156 SACREd WOundS nurture those who have been hurt, and who ardently want to do faith better and support those healing. This chapter is for both ends of the spectrum—written by the voices who from experience know the arduous and painful journey, as well as the potential for hope and healing. To SuRVIVoRS… THE QuESTIoN ASKED: What do you wish people who are being hurt by their faith communities could know? HoPE: What I would like to tell people currently being hurt by their faith communities is two things: 1). God sees and knows, and he will avenge the wrong things done to them in His time. The truth will come out some day, and 2). Don’t ever let go of God even if people claiming to be his representatives are blowing it horridly. God is not to blame for the wrongdoing and the pain, and He can and will redeem it in our lives if we are patient. I would like them to know that they are worthy of finding a healthy church..’ It took us a long time to wait for God to show us a healthy church (where we have been now for a long time), but it was worth the wait. When we stopped trying to be members in a denomination of our choice (the one we were in), we could focus on listening to God and watch what a healthy church looked like. MELINDA: I wish they could know that people can be shitty. Shitty stuff happens. If, here in the Unites States the way you were treated is/was illegal, then the perpetrator should be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. I wish they could know that the strength to heal is inside them, and they are totally worth it. KISHA: What I tell anyone who at any time feels unsafe in their faith community is two words: “Get out.” I am almost never that direct regarding anything else in life, and I am extremely evasive when it comes to giving people advice. However, people’s safety is of huge concern to me, and I will never be silent when it comes to protecting someone else’s safety and well-being. I have a zero tolerance policy for other people’s victimization to abuse and maltreatment. DEANNA: Give yourself time. It’s the worst prescription and the best one. Let yourself grieve whatever beliefs you are leaving because it is not an easy transition. Let yourself just be. If you can’t go to church today, that’s okay. If you can’t open your Bible today, that’s okay too. Cling to those around you who make you feel safe and loved for THE VOICES OUT OF DARkNESS 157 exactly who you are. God is in the midst of those hugs and tears, and that laughter around the dinner table. Take time to examine yourself and your heart. What triggers you? What doesn’t? Where does it hurt and why? The more you can articulate this—and it sometimes can take years of work, so don’t get frustrated with yourself when you can’t pinpoint it overnight—the better you will be able to find a new path. KATE: I think there is a deep need for communities of meaning. People need others they can count on. People need to be challenged to live out their values in an ever-wider circles of influence. MARG: No one could have told me anything that would have helped for many years. But once I got sober, the best thing anyone could have said to me was what katherine Unthank said in that workshop. In essence, “You have suffered a debilitating trauma, and your life has been forever changed by it.” Almost as important, but necessarily subsequently presented, is what Nancy Hardesty would say to me later, “You are always welcome at Her table.” BILL: For people hurt by faith, there are some terribly abusive situations, and people need to get out of those. If your faith is causing you pain in any way, you should pursue things that make you feel alive and whole, as long as it is healthy not hurtful. Whatever that is, do it. When you find things that make you more whole, whatever it is, pursue that. If you are more despondent doing something, you need to be able to drop that thing. I think that applies with faith/ tradition. I also understand that church/faith communities are human institutions and whatever community you find will have those same dynamics. You are going to have the same relational dynamics in your context. There will be disappointment, betrayal, and hurt anywhere. For anyone who has the courage to keep slogging through that to find a faith community, I think that is also a wonderful thing. To FAITH CoMMuNITIES… THE QuESTIoN ASKED: What do you wish people in religion/ church culture could understand about how they treat people in general and those who are wounded? How do you think they should treat people who have been wounded? HoPE: I wish people would understand that a little love and patience goes a long way... in our case, it was a case of the church deciding our son was “out of control” (He was not, but he is on the autism spectrum, and it took him much longer to learn things, and it 158 SACREd WOundS was much harder for him than it was for a neurotypical child.) Had they tried to be more patient and understanding, and had they been trustworthy and respectful, things would have been so different. We wanted to stay there. We deeply grieved being kicked out, and the pain, though healed in many ways by God after 15 years, is still now there on some very deep levels, and I think to some extent it will be until we get to heaven where God wipes away all tears. What I wish someone from that church had told me was that the church knew the truth and was going to stand on it. Instead the people admitted to us that they were “confused” and that the “only thing we know to do is to ‘submit’“. So they knew that something stunk but went along with it. I can’t do that. If I think something stinks I have to stand up and take a stand even if it costs me. MELINDA: Listen better. Hear victims out. Listen more. Listen again. Listen until they are done telling the whole story. And then be the embodiment of empathy. DAVID: My hope is not holding onto our scriptures rather than a person. My hope is for faith communities to be more open-minded, have a bigger mindset, and able to break out of the old paradigms—I believe thinking and feeling big can change the world. That is what I am hoping for and trying to contribute to—critiquing limiting styles in the church and helping people to be independent and interdependent. I think the mindset should be “Out with the bad and in with the good. “ KISHA: Ministry is as much about what God wants to do in you as it is about what He wants to do through you. Meanwhile, for those within religious systems who believe they can “fix” others, please stop. Physician, heal thyself. Love people where they are, receive grace for yourself, and then extend it to others. That’s about all you are equipped to do, and in most unhealed circumstances, that is all that is needed: community. FAY: Stop shooting their wounded! Listen before you speak! Be There! Cut out the cliché answers and interpretations of scripture out of context to offer words of wisdom. I wish I had been told I was loved more than their fears and their own feelings and judgments. Rebuilding and forgiveness come from admitting wrongs. DEANNA: One thing: If you care about the doctrine more than the person, you are doing it wrong. Countless times throughout the Gospels, Jesus violated the rules in order to take care of people. I THE VOICES OUT OF DARkNESS 159 think we need to treat one another like neighbors first. Religion and doctrine come later, not the other way around. There is too much false information about other faith groups, and it is breeding fear and hate, which lead to violence. We are all on this earth here together. We are here for one another, and we need to start acting like it. I remember talking to my mother about going on a trip with an organization that helps child soldiers in Uganda. The first thing out of her mouth was, “Are they a Christian organization?” I said I didn’t know for sure, but that they were doing really great work. She said that there wasn’t really a point in going if they didn’t share this gospel. This is a really common viewpoint by many Christians, but it is a toxic one. It says that God does not care about the basic human needs of “unbelievers.” That could not be further from the truth. The God I know cares less about your rightness of theology and more about not enslaving small children. He cares more about providing water for the residents of Detroit and pulling women out of human trafficking. To ever suggest otherwise is to blaspheme the heart of God. (I don’t often use the word “blasphemy,” but I truly believe this. I don’t know much, but I do know that.) DEB: When people are representing themselves as an authority on God and Christianity, they have a lot of responsibility to their followers to make sure they are getting the right message. I wish they would realize they are playing a key part in influencing the faith of those who may not know what it is outside of that community. I have been told many times to give my pain to God. What is difficult about that is knowing that God is an all-knowing God. He knows my pain. He saw me go through it. If he wanted me to give him my pain, why would he allow me to have it in the first place? I think that communities need to realize there is true damage that can be done to someone’s psyche, and the answer is not as simple as giving it up to God. Thankfully God allows us to be smart enough to have professionals who can help you on your healing journey, but mental health issues have always been dismissed as something that can be cured by having faith in God. KATE: Well, I wish someone on the Plymouth staff had called to say goodbye instead of maintaining radio silence after I asked to be taken off their membership list. You’d think that 25 years of volunteering, financial support, leadership roles, etc., would merit a “Thank you; we’re sorry to see you go.” I think churches should be 160 SACREd WOundS generous when members move on – they should find ways to express thanks and offer sincere good wishes. It hurt me when they let my husband leave without so much as a “see you around.” It hurt me when they treated me the same way six months later. JuLIE: I’ve always been surprised people in the church and especially leaders don’t want to know why you left or changed your beliefs. They don’t want to hear your story. They just want to tell you how wrong/sinful you are. But then some of the people who loved and really helped us were also Christian leaders. They were a blatant exception, but I’ll always be really thankful for them. MARG: How you treat the least of your fellow human beings defines the nature of your faith. Isolating from, attacking, and denigrating LGBTQ people ruins Jesus for us and devalues the Gospel. I don’t think the result of anything, any policy, or any practice, should ever be something that ruins Jesus for anyone. What can faith communities do? Recognize that LGBT people suffer from deep spiritual wounds because almost every single one of us does. For many of us, well, I’m not sure those wounds will ever fully heal; they just become part of our story. Faith communities must intentionally validate our struggle, and conscientiously participate in the efforts to challenge the views and interpretations of scripture that enable this spiritual wounding to continue. To stand by and allow this attack on an entire group of people to continue unchallenged is to implicitly demean our humanity. Faith communities must admit the reality of the trauma we have suffered at the hands of Christian people. They must recognize this has left us with special issues regarding trust, fear, and the perception of how we are being treated. They must be patient and forgiving when these issues affect how we behave. Faith communities must recognize these wounds do not heal themselves over time. They only fester. So we must be encouraged to tell our stories when we are able to do so. People of faith must listen intently to the stories of the LGBT people in their midst. Christians must admit their own part in perpetrating the injury or allowing it to happen. LGBT people may even be able to respond with authentic words of forgiveness at times. These wounds we carry will simply not heal when they are closed up and left untended. The wounds we carry must be lovingly tended to with genuine compassion. Faith communities must strive to love LGBT people with abandon and appreciate the unique voice we bring to the table. THE VOICES OUT OF DARkNESS 161 DAVE: Every single religion that believes in a God believes in a God who creates love and structure in their lives, so why would you ever want to confuse the kids walking into your church and make them think God is anything but love and acceptance? What is the purpose of it? Don’t tarnish other people’s beliefs and choices. What is the purpose of doing that? All organized religions need to understand everyone may believe something a little different, and they, like us, are entitled to believe in that system. There are many disciples for many different traditions out there, and it doesn’t mean one is wrong and one is right, so why don’t we just keep it that way? If I like chocolate milk, and someone likes vanilla, then enjoy your milk, and I will enjoy mine. Now, strawberry milk makes me sick, but I don’t go around knocking strawberry milk out of other people’s hands. They are all milk, and they are all real. We can’t say any one of them doesn’t exist. I like religions that say, “These are my beliefs,; they don’t have to be your beliefs,” and are welcoming. God is about acceptance because everyone is flawed and everyone sins, and when people make a mistake, you don’t want to be made to feel you are going to hell over it. I think God accepts everyone, and I want to do the same. BILL: In my age group and demographic, a lot of people are the “nones” [spiritual but not religious] and they are leaving church. So I think whenever anyone shows up at a faith community, it should be seen as a great honor, and the community should offer hospitality rather than leaving someone to find their way. The community should have sensibilities about others. If I invited you over for dinner, and then I just sit down and start eating as you are standing there with your coat on, leaving you to figure it all out, that would not be hospitable. Or if I have a ritual at my dinner table, and I don’t explain what is going to happen, that is not hospitable. I am responsible to help you land in my home. Faith communities I have been a part of have been like, “We are eating dinner and I may acknowledge you, but I’m doing my thing.” For me it is all about hospitality and empathy. If you never saw football and went to the Super Bowl, your head would explode. It is all symbolic and helping people learn what the symbols and meanings are is a faith community’s responsibility.