144 SACREd WOundS of the trauma and the abuser will always have more control over our lives than we do. 2. No one is mandated to heal—it is a choice. We have to respect that choice when it is made by others, and we have to be tender with ourselves if we are not ready to find internal reconciliation for our wounded experience. 3. The healing and reconciliation path continues communally, even if some are not ready to make the journey. It’s like going to a big event—not everyone fits on the first shuttle, and not everyone is ready to get on, but the shuttle bus leaves with whoever gets on board, and then comes back around until everyone who wants to get to the event has a chance to get on board. But the event doesn’t wait to start until everyone gets there—we just get on at different points and get to the healing and reconciliation process in our own time. 4. until we have found our own way to reconcile our hurts and let go of hatred and rage, we will carry that heavy part of our wound with us. There are amazing methods for creating safe space and communal dialogue about communal hurts I have come to know from Native communities doing this work. Their models lend us a lot of good source material for how we can create the communal healing, as well as the individual healing. 5. Education and justice are just as important as healing. To have people understand this hurt experience and to have a safe space where people can tell their stories and ways to organize around transformation justice are essential. But without the healing and inner reconciliation, the external healing and engagement with a communal process is not yet possible. 6. Heal in your own time and find your own path to inner peace. There will always be another shuttle bus whenever you are ready. We must honor our own journey, and our own journey needs to be honored by others. As trauma healing from religious injury becomes more talked about, and formulas for both individual and communal reconciliation and healing are begun, there are many things we can learn from our Native brothers and sisters on how to manifest this process powerfully and respectfully for all involved. They have been holding the tension between healing and reconciliation, as well as trauma and faith, for a very long time.