INTRODUCTION The Human Story, Ad Infinitum The sacred wounds infinity symbol illustrates that our wounds are inextricably linked to the sacred, and the sacred is inextricably linked to our wounds. Our hurt is the origin of our transformation. As Rumi once reflected, “The wound is where the light enters.” As someone whose life has been peppered with wounds, I can say, definitively that hurt has been the birthplace of the greatest and most transformative places of light entering my life. Most of the time it didn’t look that way on the face of it—it always felt like death. But if we study any myth or religious origin story since the beginning of time, we will see over and over again that death is also the midwife to new life. Like the infinity symbol, the journey of life and the spiritual life is not a period or an exclamation point —it is a winding figure eight that constantly feeds back into itself, ad infinitum. The cracks are where the light gets in. The pain and suffering of life at its peak can transition to joy. Much like real childbirth, only when the pain reaches a crescendo do we burst into a new place of our own possibility, of infinity, and that crack is where the light gets in. In therapy, I don’t over-divulge about my pains with clients, and in life I don’t spend a lot of time ruminating on them. I think part of the benefit of moving through suffering is leaving a trail behind, the crumbs of hope and healing, so others can see it is possible to 1 2 SACREd WOundS get better—not just in theory but in reality. I think there is value in exploring our pain and sharing when it is appropriate, so that others can see there is a trail to follow. By no means do I have it all figured out, but I know there is a path to wholeness and healing through trauma, the pain of spiritual disappointment, and other areas of life that disappoint. This book is meant to be a roadmap to that hopeful place—not just created by my own tales of woe and reconciliation, but with the bravery of a multitude of voices who have walked the path of pain and found hope. Let them be a lamplight to the unending journey, so that we might be able to see what is possible for us all. We are never-ending. We are warriors and creators. We are divine and sacred and worthy. You are worthy without caveat or exception. Let the story-making and the hope-mongering begin. It is not just the story of me, but the story of us. Welcome to the shared and sacred journey. Oftentimes, it has been those moments where pain intrudes when I really listen. I’ve begun to realize a personal paradigm shift is about to happen. I had such a moment standing in the dimly lit room of the yoga studio in Hoboken, New Jersey. I had spent Monday nights there for the last year. Huddled in the small basement with a room of eager 20-and-30-somethings seeking enlightenment from our Buddhist teacher, I sought respite from the painful hypocrisy of my Catholic youth. It wasn’t a conscious thought, but it was something like, If anyone can avoid absolutes and platitudes it’s got to be the Buddhists. Unfortunately, I was headed for a different kind of awakening— one more akin to the “rude” kind. Yet surprisingly, it freed me from my illusion that only my faith tradition could be hurtful. I loved my Mondays spent in the candlelight on mats and meditation chairs. The first half was always an exploration of foundational Buddhist teachings, which we all scribbled in our notebooks ravenously. Although many of the students were also students in the yoga teacher-training program, we were all seekers on a quest. The second half was always guided meditation practice. This was where I learned the power of visualizations in meditation to quiet my mind and calm the chaos of thoughts cluttering up my daily life. So when I bought my ticket to go see the Dalai Lama speak at Lehigh University, nearly a year into my studies with my monastic nun teacher, I thought it would be a proud moment as I asserted my