THE LOTUS AND THE MUD 143 In the film, after Red recounts this story of escape from suffering, he closes by saying, “I remember thinking it would take a man six hundred years to tunnel under the wall with it [an old rock hammer]. Old Andy did it in less than twenty…Andy Dufresne, who crawled through a river of shit and came out clean on the other side.” We all have this potential. This is why I remind my clients of this story. We all have the ability to move through the crap of our suffering and come out clean on the other side. Or we can sit in rage and hate. Both are choices. We decide which way we go, but transformation is only available to those who crawl through the crap. We cannot control who hurts us, in and out of faith, but we can control how we respond. I have seen so many people live their lives in the tunnel of bile and sludge, and many who live inside the prison forever. We cannot control what happens to us, but we can control what we do with it. Reconciliation in Healing, Healing in Reconciliation: Lessons from the Reservation I have worked on internal and personal reconciliation out of trauma and hurt with clients for years, but I think I have learned the most about the path of reconciliation both personally and communally from my work with indigenous communities and the Doctrine of Discovery with colleagues from the Episcopal Church. The profundity of reconciliation with Native peoples and Christianity cannot be underplayed. To be a Native person and a Christian, or even to live in contemporary Western culture in and of itself requires an inherent dimension of reconciliation and forgiveness. Two parts of a person are torn between loving and living in the communities who hurt their families and ancestors and many times even those in their present-day lives. I have learned a few lessons of the tether-holding healing and reconciliation together—as two essential pieces of the same process. 1. Healing and reconciliation are bound together. To have whole person healing, you need to find a way to reconcile the hurts of the past. This does not mean to forget it or ignore the wrong, or avoid seeking justice, but to internally find a way to heal from the hurts others have imposed on our lives. —Otherwise, this power