CHAPTER 4 Faith of Origin Religious Roots and Family Issues All the trials we endure cannot be compared to these interior battles. — Teresa of Avila As an international adoptee, born in Colombia, I spent the better part of my childhood and adolescence imagining my origins. This ranged from imagining my birthmother trekking down from a mountain tribe to bring me to the orphanage, run by Grey Order nuns (that part is true), before she trekked back up to her community, to envisioning a secret affair between my birthmother, a maid, in the home of Pablo Escobar, who had to take her love child to the orphanage in the covert cover of night, before my birthfather, kingpin of the South Americas, even knew I existed. I share this embarrassing bit of false childhood narrative only to describe the ways we try to make sense of our origins—whether familial or faithful. After finding out I couldn’t have children, I wondered where I began or ended if the genealogy of “me” was a one-woman family tree—more like a genealogical stump. I wasn’t sure what to do with being a genealogical stump. I had no beginnings or endings—literally speaking. I never thought it mattered until it was a fact. Then it was all that mattered. In the depths of my personal existentialism, or as Anne of Green Gables might say, “depths of despair,” I was hit by a reminder by way of an eccentric feminism professor who was an equally eccentric 74 FAITH OF ORIGIN 75 clairvoyant, and my namesake, Teresa of Avila. Let me explain—in brief. At the very end of my sad attempt at babymaking, I found myself in a kind of desperation—the kind that no longer had anything to do with the source intention (to create life) and everything to do with the forceful perseverance of the truly stubborn. It became entirely about doing the undoable, and by doing so, being able to create or recreate my entire life story, only the smallest of delusions for this once-dreamer of the impossible. Somehow I had entangled my lack of identity found in my adolescence with this need to have some genetic future. For someone who had lived a life and experienced a childhood built out of family of choice rather than genetics, I seemed to have lost my compass entirely. I became obsessed with my origins and depressed by my lack of future—in the literal sense. Then Teresa came back into my life. About a decade earlier, a feminist professor of mine had insisted I read Interior Castle by Teresa of Avila. Teresa happened to be my namesake—first brought into my life, as far as I knew it, in my naming by the Grey Order nuns a few decades earlier when they realized I was born on October 15, her saint’s day. I forgot about her for a couple of decades until urged to read her manifesto in undergraduate school by my slightly odd feminism professor who fashioned herself a bit of a psychic. As psychic as she wasn’t, in this one way she read exactly what I needed, possibly by serendipity far beyond her capacity. So Teresa came into my scope again when I found myself unable to manifest life in the way we girls are taught we are intrinsically created to do from the first story of “where babies come from.” Then I went to this clairvoyant session with a circle of women, hoping for one last hope, that some psychic electricity would ordain me for biological parenthood—when all biology spoke to the contrary. Whoever she was and whatever her true talents were I don’t know, but she told me one thing, which carried with me from that day forward. I asked to speak to my mother, and she asked which one, an odd question for a universe that never presupposes adoption as a person’s life story. I said my birth mother. The message that came was this, “We are manifesters. The both of us. We burn bright and hot, and together we would have been a disaster. Whatever way you are meant to in this world you are a manifester.” 76 SACREd WOundS What is truth and what is fiction? I don’t know. But I know the message I received that night was true, and I realized it was outside of biology. There are many ways we manifest. I remembered in that moment my namesake, Teresa of Avila. She never gave birth to a single life, but she gave birth over and over again in her lifetime. She was a manifester, and she was my primogenitor. Out of that moment and a few subsequent encounters with that Teresa of my origin since, I realized that she was my birthplace. She was where I came from— in a way that was truer than biology and more real than time. The limitations of my small scope of view didn’t diminish the expanse of my lineage. I realized that I was born of mystic fire—and everything else was semantics. Long before I would have used the word “mystic” to describe the fire within that always burned, I had a birth mother. I had always had a birth mother. Her name was Teresa. I only explain this to illustrate the way we box ourselves in by the stories we tell ourselves of who we are, the life we lived, and the meaning of it all. When we look outside the limits of what is, we see what is possible, and the fire of that reality is greater than facts, history, or biology. We are all meant to be something more. We have to learn that our life stories, our life scripts, are what we make them. We are given the raw and literal material of life—we have to see the roots of our origins—but then we have the latitude to manifest our truths in whatever way liberates us from them. We see our truth and then create our destiny—this is the intrinsic story of healing. Let us begin with the roots. Since we have to see the origins of our familial and spiritual stumps, or trees or vines, before we can rescript our futures, we will begin with what is and from that we will mold the clay into what is possible. Faith and Family Systems We learn everything from our primary caregivers. How does a person know what love is, what it looks like, or how to love another person? They learn it because their primary caregivers teach them about love and how to love. In therapy, the term for the system that raises us is called our “family of origin.” The family that raises us is our family of origin, and they also become the place of origin for everything we know, believe, and feel. They set the template for a life of understanding the world. The potency of this early life is the reason FAITH OF ORIGIN 77 why trauma experienced in childhood is so devastating and damaging. This is made even more complex when we look at trauma occurring within the family system that is also surrounded or enmeshed with a faith system. In my study of religious community systems and trauma, I have come to call this system that encircles the family system as the “faith of origin.” The faith of origin is the religious system that has “raised” you, for all intents and purposes. It is the system that (usually) surrounds the family system and enforces or reinforces the values taught by the family. When both family and faith systems are healthy, they reflect to a child a value system that can facilitate caring and kindness, love for all others, generosity and graciousness, and a sense of accountability to do good to others. When either system does not reflect those values, it can be powerfully hurtful. Imagine if the family system is abusive, violent, or unhealthy, but the faith system is healthy—there is confusion for children between what they are being taught in the pews or faith community versus what happens behind closed doors. This can lead to becoming jaded about one or both systems. Conversely, the family system could project and enforce a healthy kind of love but the faith system, community, or leadership could reflect something different. This also can lead to jaded impressions of at least the faith system. The most hazardous and common kind of interaction between the family of origin and the faith of origin systems that breed faith wounding is where the two work together to enforce and then reinforce a negating God image. If we think of the parent figure in a house as the ultimate figurehead of right and wrong, then we can think of the image of God as the ultimate form of parentage. If we consider abuse, rejection, or shaming by a parent as the most damaging traumatic wound (or at least the one with the most extensive impact on a person throughout their lifetime), then imagine how much that is compounded when the “parent” is God. Imagine as well if the family, community, and religious institution creates and then reinforces whatever abuse, rejection, or shaming a person is experiencing— and then tells the traumatized person that God brought his or her suffering on and that it is deserved. Talk about some family baggage. This is cosmically bound family baggage. This is also why it is so difficult for people to see their way out of this kind of God and these kinds of systems. If my family is the place of my abuse/hurt, but my faith community is a place of refuge, then 78 SACREd WOundS I have some way to reflect goodness into my life and onto myself. If my faith community is the place of my abuse/hurt, but my family is a place of refuge, then I also have some way to reflect goodness into my life and onto myself. If my faith community and my family reflect only the abuse/hurt and mutually reinforce it, unless I have some other frame of reference (which is less likely in environments where family and faith community are so linked because they are often very insular as well), I see myself only as they see me. I have no frame of reference to tell me I am good or should not be ashamed, or that God or the world can love me exactly as I am. There is no one to tell me it is not ok to be hurt or abused by people or systems when everyone I know is part of a shaming or abusing system. This is what makes religious trauma so insidious and difficult for people to get away from or find a voice to say, “No.” When I meet people in my study of religious trauma, I begin with this question, “What did the God of your childhood look and act like?” How people answer this is often the greatest reflection of how they see themselves and the best definition of what kind of faith community they come from. If it is healthy, loving, and nurturing, then the God of their childhood will reflect that—and in a healthy family system their parents will look the same. In an abusive system and family, the lack of love and acceptance will be reflected and the God-father will often look much like the home-father. God is personified and father is deified in the worst and best scenarios according to the love or abuse of that family/faith system. At this point it is useful to introduce a few more terms. These terms are therapeutic terms, which offer ways to look at unhealthy relationships. If we consider that either family and faith institutions can be independently or jointly unhealthy systems, it is important to understand unhealthy relationship concepts as well. understanding Family Issues Codependency Codependency is a relationship built on an unhealthy amount of neediness—where one side is the inherent caretaker, and the other is dependent on the caretaker to function. Neither is fully or wholly independent of the other; it is like being born with two arms and two legs but living as if you only have one of each—thereby FAITH OF ORIGIN 79 making half your limbs weak to the point of immobilization. With addiction disorders, codependency is due to the compulsive nature of the need and the common instance of one or more people in a codependent relationship being addicted to drugs/alcohol. In an unhealthy or abusive religious context, codependency can be rampant. Community members are codependent on the institution and the dogma, the institution is dependent on the doctrines, and the abused/traumatized persons often find themselves in the middle of a web of codependency—on the family system, community, institution, doctrines, and beyond. This is another reason leaving an unhealthy faith community can be so hard—it can feel as if leaving a very dependent relationship and years of only using half of your spiritual and emotional limbs can leave someone very weak when he or she decides to leave. It takes time and work to make those limbs function again, but it is not impossible. Understanding the inherent dependency in the unhealthy faith relationship is a valuable tool for beginning to repair the damage. Enmeshed/Enmeshment Enmeshment is a function of codependency. To be enmeshed is as it sounds. It is when two things are strongly bound together, like a wire fence. Each strand of one is tightly wound around the other, so that all parts of one overlap with the other. When someone is enmeshed, it is hard to identify personal feelings, thoughts, and aspirations—this person is so wound around someone else or another community/system that it is impossible to know the “I” outside of the “we.” Unhealthy religious and family systems rely on enmeshment to keep people bound and wound tightly around the center. If I don’t know where I end, how can I know what I want or need? If I don’t know what is you and what is me, how will I ever know I can say “no” when something seems wrong? Like the overarching tent of codependency, it is important to acknowledge enmeshment in your life to begin untangling yourself from the wires around which you are bound. It is very hard to become unwound from enmeshed religious and family systems that fall inside of enmeshed religious contexts. (Family of) Addiction You may remember the adage from karl Marx: “Religion is the opium of the people.” While we can say this is a bit oversimplified 80 SACREd WOundS and jaded of Mr. Marx, it is hard to deny there is a certain tenor of addiction to unhealthy religious systems. The most detrimental religious systems are often the most seductive in their fundamentalism. Fundamentalism gets a bad rap for good reason, but it makes life so simple. Everything is clear—black and white—and carries with it no room for opinion. While for some of us that may seem horrifying, for people who have felt lost inside their own life choices or have grown up in a system of fundamentalism, independence can seem terrifying. This is the bread and butter of fundamentalism—to prey on the fear of ambiguity and to promise a sense of peace and ease with their (whoever they are) brand of certitude. This kind of simplicity can be addictive. I have seen the way it feeds people’s need to feel safe in a way that is undeniably alluring, alluring in a way, like Marx articulated, that could be synonymous with an opiate. For years I have counseled people in recovery from unhealthy religious systems and substance addiction. Both are very hard to kick, and relapse can happen. Unhealthy Attachment Attachment describes what the root word implies—how we attach to one another. Namely, in psychology, it specifically describes how we attach to other people from our initial experience of relationship with our parentage, and then is translated or imprinted onto every relationship afterward. The way we attach can be healthy or unhealthy and conditional on that primary relationship (parentage in family and faith) that teaches us all we know of love and loving. In a healthy attachment, we know we are loved, but we are not so dependent on what we love that we feel we can’t function without it/them. In a healthy attachment we can know how to love and be loved, but we can also be independent beings.. In an unhealthy attachment we are overly dependent on our love object (be it person or deity) and feel we cannot function without being in their presence constantly or having their assistance to do even the basic functions of life. Unhealthy attachment is the sweet spot of a fundamentalist system—it feeds on that need and holds on too tight. Learning to find the balance of love, community, and faith is a learned experience, and it can be very difficult to move from unhealthy to healthy attachment—it means restructuring the whole way a person functions in all manner of relationship. Like anything else, it is possible. With work and time, all