CHAPTER 2 Inside the Animal Symptoms, Jargon, and Manifestations of Religious Injury Permanent good can never be the outcome of untruth and violence. — Mahatma Gandhi I opened Chapter 1 of this book with my own story of religious wounding at the hands of a summer camp experience gone wrong. After I wrote the story, with the memory fresh in my mind, I was talking with a fellow therapist and explaining my experience. It is not a story I keep in my back pocket; it is not my cocktail party fodder, unless, of course, it is a cocktail party rife with church-hurt survivors (and, yes, before you ask, I actually have been at many of those parties, over the years, either intentionally or accidentally). So it was out of the ordinary that I would be telling it to a friend and colleague. It came out of a conversation in which I was trying to explain this book, what it was about, and why I was writing it. I told her about the camp and its adventure sports premise and propaganda-schooling underbelly. I told her about the long night of bullying and my intentional movement away from church following the experience. I didn’t really have a particular expectation for her response. I knew her mother was an atheist, burned by a rigidly conservative and punitive Lutheran church upbringing, and her father was Jewish. I knew her family, and she attended a Unitarian Universalist church 32 INSIDE THE ANIMAL 33 now, but not with any substantive regularity. I knew they celebrated Christmas and Chanukah and were put off by anything smelling of crazy-Christian. I knew her UU church back home had a gender-neutral bathroom with a picture of a man, woman, and transgendered person on the stall door. These are the things we had discussed: our surface confluence of theology and baseline faith histories. So when I finished my story, I didn’t know what she would think of my experience. She paused for a moment and then began to speak, and something absurdly cosmic and comedic happened. It was a cosmic comedy of errors, of sorts. It turned out she had also been sent away to adventure camp, a camp that also spelled their camp with a cutesy “k” at the beginning and a long “k” name following, sounding eerily similar to my own camp’s name. She had gone because friends were going and was lured in by the promising brochure pictures of kids smiling while whitewater rafting, zip-lining, and swimming. The only difference from the start was that her camp was in North Carolina and mine in Missouri. Then she began her traumatic church-hurt story, which put my night of heaven-based- interrogation to shame. If you experience triggering from your own personal traumas with religion, you might want to skip over the next two sections detailing her experience. She said she had been at camp a couple of weeks, and was settling in to the rhythms of the days; it seemed pretty benign, and the usual camp fare of sub-par food and crammed bunk-bed cabins. She knew her friends she had followed to camp were Christian, and the fact that it was definitely a Christian camp became clear early on with their haphazard insertion of Jesus Christ into every activity, community gathering, and meal. Not being brought up in a traditionally “religious” home, it was a new system of functioning— not bothersome, just different. Then one day she went to arts and crafts, and the campers were asked to make lanyard keychains for their parents. For her mother, she made a bouquet of flowers. For her father, she made a series of connected Stars of David. As she was working on her last star, her camp counselor came over and asked what she was making. “I’m making a keychain for my dad,” she said in her happy and eager 12-year-old voice. “What are those on your key chain?” the art teacher asked, pointing to her stars. 34 SACREd WOundS “They are Stars of David, because he is Jewish.” Nearby the ears of fellow campers and counselors perked up, as the syllabic makeup of a word unfamiliar to their ears echoed in the air. ”Your father is Jewish?!” The shrillness of her art teacher’s voice frightened her. Even though she could not register why, she knew something had just changed. Suddenly all the counselors were huddled around her asking questions and shooting statements at her like darts at a target. “You can’t make those stars in this class, don’t you know that?” ”Jewish! You know your daddy is going to Hell, don’t you?” “Um, I, well, ok, I don’t know.” She stammered, nervously, not sure what to do or say. After the art room debacle, everything changed. Word spread quickly to all the adults in camp that her father was Jewish, and soon everyone over the age of 18 on the camp grounds was approaching her throughout each day, telling her the penalties for not being Christian (earthly and cosmic) and asking her, repeatedly, to accept Jesus Christ as her personal Lord and Savior. She was flustered and increasingly scared. She was only 12, way too young to confidently ward off that kind of harassment. She asked her counselors to call her parents, but she had been put on phone restrictions. Word was out that she was not allowed to make or take calls. So she started writing letters daily to her parents, telling them what was happening and pleading with them to come get her. Days passed that felt like forever. She couldn’t understand why her parents weren’t answering her letters, which became increasingly desperate. When she asked questions about her letters, someone, a weak link in the chain, told her all her letters sat in the camp director’s office. A mandate had gone out that her letters to her parents were not to be sent. In desperation, she wrote her grandmother, hoping maybe they wouldn’t catch those letters. She was right. Her letter made it to her grandmother, who immediately called her mother and made it clear that if her mother didn’t go get her, she was going to drive up to North Carolina from Florida to get her. Her mother was in disbelief. Who in their right mind wouldn’t be? What kind of camp would do that to a child? But before her mother could react, the girl in distress got clever and began to figure out an action that might get results. She was