INSIDE THE ANIMAL 39 After time and emotional distance from the original experience, it may be possible to address the trigger when you are exposed to it by simple grounding and breathing practices to center you in your body, mind, and spirit. Many of the practices offered at the end of each chapter, namely the three-part breath, can offer a way to calm yourself when faced with triggering experiences. Intrusive Thoughts and Flashbacks When a person is triggered in some way to remember their negative or traumatic experience, this is an intrusive thought. It is a thought from an experience of the past that intrudes on a person’s present life. A flashback is a more extreme response to a reminder of the past in the present. During flashbacks, people actually feel as if they are returning to a particular traumatic episode from their past. This can last a second or a minute (and longer in extreme cases), but it feels in that moment like the person is right back in that stress. The difference between intrusive thoughts and flashbacks is that with thoughts, the person is still in some way grounded in the present. With flashbacks, the person is mentally taken away and back to the traumatic incident[s]. Examples of Intrusive Thoughts and Flashbacks in Religious Trauma In religious trauma, just like in most traumatic experiences, intrusive thoughts or flashbacks take a person back to situations of high distress because those are the thoughts most prominent in our mind—in trauma these thoughts get stuck or lodged in the forefront of our mind and this is why they are accessible so easily when triggered. This may be a specific incident of distress or emotional/ physical danger, or it may just bring back the memory of a person or group or setting in which repeated trauma happened—like a faith-based space, a certain religious leader, or a family member who utilized negative dogma to abuse or diminish someone. Simple Tools to Address Intrusive Thoughts and Flashbacks in Religious Trauma The most effective way to deal with an intrusive thought or the emotional and physical aftereffects of it is to be able to calm yourself back down. They can be very overwhelming in all parts of the self