122 SACREd WOundS my heart all was not well. I began to live in daydreams and to feel horribly guilty about them. That was the beginning of the dichotomy between my tumultuous inside life and the perfect image I showed everyone on the outside. My family left ATI when I was nearing the end of high school. In the Baptist circles I grew up in, Bill Gothard was seen as too ecumenical. But as far as my life went, after college, the damage had already been done. I looked at all the stuff I was doing to be a successful Christian: daily devotions and prayer, proper dress and music, moral purity, work in the local church, evangelism, discipleship, and being a full-time missionary. But inside I was so desperately empty! Did God love me? Or even accept me? After three months I was desperate for help but did not know how or who to ask. So I made a very loud cry for help: I overdosed on sleeping pills. My coworkers and mission board were shocked. My dichotomy was exposed. Everyone in my world could now see the truth about me: this “successful” Christian was really a great big failure. But I saw hope from one source. My dad had a friend from college, and this friend had a daughter and son-in-law who ministered to broken Christians. Because they were family friends, I was happy to hear from them, and when they started emailing me, I was amazed. They helped me see that God loved and accepted me unconditionally. I was so desperate for this truth after my suicide attempt I decided to move back to the States and receive counseling from this couple. The problem was that they were not Baptists, nor did they live a lifestyle separated from “the world,” as I had been taught to live. All my authorities (my parents, pastor, Bible College) were adamant that I not go to this couple for counseling. They tried hard to warn me that I was too vulnerable and would compromise my higher standards by being around them. But for the first time in my life I had resonated with their message of unconditional love, so I disagreed with my authorities and directly “disobeyed” them. I was 25 years old. I did not learn to think for myself overnight, however. While I soaked up my counselors’ love and acceptance, trying hard to believe that God really loved me that way, I also became very codependent on them. I was trained to be dependent on others my entire life, and one solitary act of independence could not immediately change that. …As it turned out, my counselor took full advantage of my trained submissiveness and began grooming me for sex. As my counselor, he PEELING THE ONION 123 controlled me emotionally, molding me to the place where I believed I could not survive without him. Over three long years he used my body. I would ask him to stop, but he said God was Ok with it, and that when the time came, it would stop naturally. Over the years I was receiving “counseling” from this couple, I learned to self-injure, had multiple suicide attempts, ended up in a psychiatric unit four times, and developed an eating disorder. Finally, I had the courage to ask the counselor’s wife for help, and I told her everything. She and her husband had a “reconciliation” meeting with me, in which we were each to apologize. However, they had my apology already decided. I was to ask them to forgive me for seducing him. I was stunned because I had no clue how I had seduced him. But being submissive, as I had been trained to do, I confessed to seduction. As a result, I believed I was a whore and an adulteress, and could never tell anyone my horrible secret. The sexual abuse stopped for a while, but because I never asked anyone on the outside for help, it eventually started all over again, and I still felt powerless to stop it. Mercifully, God rescued me from the cycle of abuse. A man on their Board of Directors (who had been told of the abuse by the couple after our mutual apology session, but had been sworn to secrecy by them) suggested I move away. I had gone back to school since my return to the States and had become certified as a sign language interpreter, so for the first time in my life I actually had the means to be independent and self-supporting. So at the age of 32, I began the journey to find a home and a job out of state. I was so excited that I actually had the ability to be independent! While Bill Gothard’s ATI program seemed like a thing of the past for me, my parents still lived in that mindset and lifestyle. I remember the day my parents helped me move. We were up early to load everything and make the drive across the country to my new home. When we arrived, I excitedly showed them around, proud of my newfound independence. But my mom was horrified. She began to lecture me, saying I had done all of this outside of my father’s authority, and wasn’t I afraid of the judgment of God? The next day as we were eating lunch, my mom tried again. She said, “Who you used to be is who you really are, and the way you are now is because you are deluded.” It hurt deeply, but I was tasting freedom and wanted it too badly to give it up. With a great desire to heal, I found an eating disorder treatment hospital and 124 SACREd WOundS made an appointment, as this had become a primary way my pain and suffering had manifested—in my body. I still believed that my counselor’s sexual relationship with me was all my fault and that I had seduced him and was a whore. I felt intense shame. But that day in the nutritionist’s office, I heard for the first time that what I experienced was sexual abuse, and that my counselor had violated professional ethics in using his position of authority to rape me. After nine weeks of treatment in the hospital, I had the courage to tell my parents about my sexual abuse. They were heartbroken and very supportive of my healing. But after a few days, my mom asked me if I felt God’s “conviction” against me for my sins. At first, I wasn’t sure what she was talking about, but she explained. It was obvious to her that since I had chosen to go against all my authorities’ wishes when I chose this counselor, I had sinned, and the sexual abuse was the natural consequence of that sin. I was crushed. Why, when I was already drowning in shame, did Gothard’s principle of authority have to be used to pile on even more? It was this very principle that had held me hostage by causing an inability to say “no” strong or loud enough to those in authority abusing me. Being in treatment gave me the strength to contact a couple of other members of the Board of Directors and tell them what my counselor had done. The text I received that day in June from my abuser was his last effort to get me to withdraw my accusations before the Board of Directors met. Thankfully, by then I had the skills to calm down and stand firm. In their meeting, the Board mandated that he stop counseling, and later that year they voted to close his nonprofit organization. More details have come out since, and I’ve learned I was not the only woman he abused. Spiritual and Moral Injury Trauma Spiritual and moral injury can be an included part of any of the above traumatic situations but also stands independently and may not always happen directly inside of religious contexts. As discussed earlier under the general categories of trauma, it is important to also list this kind of trauma here as it can occur in religious contexts or impact the spirit. This kind of injury comes from being engaged in practices, a situation, or community group that utilizes practices against a person’s set of moral values. Sometimes the ability to see the difference of values may not appear immediately. Often after leaving PEELING THE ONION 125 religiously harmful communities, people begins to see more of the ways the systems beliefs do not match their own. This process of realization can lead most prominently to feelings of guilt and shame, but also to issues of trust and intimacy with the self and others. The inner trust issues come from a realization that parts of the community or even one’s own actions in the community were against their beliefs and morals—this can lead to guilt and shame that must be processed to be healed. other Related Religious Traumas The traumatic experiences listed above are by no means a comprehensive list of all methods of traumatization in a religious context. This list is a way to begin a cultural and communal dialogue about how unhealthy, destructive, and abusive religions can hurt people and begin to validate those hurting experiences as traumas. My hope is that this list continues to expand and become more detailed as people feel more comfortable and safe to share their stories and journeys toward healing. LIFE PARABLE: Deanna I was in a theatre group in early high school that was my first exposure to good people who weren’t also Christians. They were loving, warm, always excited when I was around, and wanted me for me, no strings attached. This was different than my faith community who expected me to dress a certain way, talk about Jesus a certain way, watch the right movies and listen to the right music, and have correct political opinions. I didn’t realize just how much pressure there was until I was in a different environment. (I was an assistant director of a play, and at the time I knew I couldn’t invite my friends because it had a few swear words, a kiss, and an allusion to sex. It was very lonely.) The second thing was that I ran into a guy from a community theatre production I had been in years before. He was my first love, with dark eyes, brown curls, and an infinitely young spirit. He wrote me letters and was always creating things by hand like leather-bound notebooks and silver rings. I was entranced. The only problem was that my church friends didn’t like him. He made too many innuendos, swore occasionally, and I could never really verify if he was a Christian or not. But none of that mattered. I loved him. Between a bunch of theater nerds who loved me for who I was, 126 SACREd WOundS and a love deemed unclean by my faith community at large, I started to see the cracks. How could these people who loved me and were there for me be the terrible people my church perceived them to be? Clearly, they were not. As I mentioned earlier, I was hungry for more spiritual knowledge, so I went looking for it. I started going to the adult Sunday school classes instead of my own. I also wandered to other youth groups, groping for something more than what my church had been spoon-feeding me my entire life. Eventually the leadership got wind that I was exploring and trying other churches. The youth pastor called me one evening to find out what was going on, and when I told him, he proceeded to yell at me for 15 minutes. Every time I tried to interject to explain, he would talk over me. His wife did the same thing to me a few nights later, saying how her husband wasn’t Billy Graham. All but one or two youth leaders abandoned me. When I shared my feelings with my church friends, many of them too deserted me. Another thing I noticed was their hypocrisy. They preached all the time about love and looking out for the least, but they rarely ever did things with communities outside of the church body and missionaries. When a girl a few years older than I got pregnant out of wedlock, the church refused to host a baby shower for her because they “didn’t want to condone her actions.” She was left out in the cold. They were strict about clothing for women too. One year they had a sexuality series in which the leaders said “ex” because they could not muster the strength to say “sex.” They said that in the seven levels of physical contact, hugging was the closest thing to intercourse itself. There was a girl who was wear clothing that fit her nicely, and they deemed it immodest because it might come up when she bends over. So they had her change into the same outfit one size up, which looked frumpy on her, and they said this was the godly, modest thing to do. They wouldn’t let other students announce they were carpooling to Acquire the Fire event because elders at the church would frown on them promoting an event with rock music. These are just a few cases where I figured out the church was far more invested in control, piety, self-righteousness, and image than about the spiritual lives of their congregants.