FAITH OF ORIGIN 85 this statement is often, “There may be no atheists in foxholes (which of course there are), but there are a hell of a lot of atheists exiting foxholes.” War taught me, in a way no other experience has before or since, the ability to stand up to most of the difficult questions of faith, life, and suffering. This is not to say that religion or spirituality in and of itself couldn’t withstand this line of questioning—but very little of deep spirituality makes it off of the assembly line floor for mainstream religion these days. That material that comes prepackaged to our doors makes it very hard for a person going through real suffering to believe in the other side of hurt. Even more complicated, when the hurt or the wound is created in the place where the faith system is being sold, it becomes nearly impossible to believe in anything. Much of what passes for religion these days is, like for so many veterans I have worked with returning from war, creating atheists; limping and fractured, crawling out of the wreckage of their suffering and into the world. The reason the contemporary branding of faith cannot hold up to the scrutiny of suffering is a multifaceted problem. For many people I have treated (both out of literal war or the war of being wounded in and out of faith spaces) over the years, the religion they were offered was one in which, simply put, good things happen to good people and bad things happen to bad people. If I take all the doctrine, dogma, and education most people receive over the first third of their lifetime (which, sadly, for some is the extent of the teaching they receive) and summarize it—that is usually what people I encounter universally say. Since the world does nothing if not disprove this credo at every turn, it is no wonder people become jaded or disenfranchised with faith. If the hurt and traumatic experience is from a religious institution, its leadership, or its membership who said, “Follow our rules, and you will be safe. Follow our rules, and you will be saved,” then people find themselves doubly hurt when they find out this is not true. The first betrayal is they were given a false worldview, and the very person(s) who violated that worldview were in the same system selling that story. Does this mean there is no such thing as complex and dimensional spirituality? Of course not. Sadly, however, it is not the faith most people have grown up with and inside.