WISDOM TEACHERS VERSUS FALSE GURUS 93 person. This is the intention of isolating the differences here, so perhaps the identification of the dysfunctional teacher can be seen and avoided much faster. What I have seen in my community, among the abundance of young people in early recovery, is a deep hunger for spirituality and a strong willingness to try to explore a “power greater than” themselves. I have seen them go through amazing transformations when they encounter humble wisdom teachers, and I have seen them encounter very dangerous things when they come into contact with false gurus. In this way they are very much like all of us who are hungry and seek spiritual wisdom and divine guidance through the teachers in our midst. It is just that in these settings of increased vulnerability the false teachers rise to the top and wisdom teachers are harder to find— because true wisdom takes time and work to gain and we are a fast food faith nation, more often than not. Which means eager spiritual seekers are so easily conned by the false teachers—both those teachers that scam us through ignorance, and those that trick us with malice. There are two particular kinds of false teachers I see most commonly—in the vulnerable places and in general (in some ways we are all in spiritually vulnerable places). The first is the unintentional false teacher—the person who genuinely believes the hurtful or dysfunctional dogma they are offering up and really believe it is helping people to be the ambassador of their doctrine. The second is more insidious—at some level this teacher knows that what they are offering is more about power than it is about belief, and they see a price tag of fame, power, or both coming to them by aligning with doctrine which will offer them this false wisdom, easily won, cheaply crafted, and sold to others at great spiritual and (often) monetary price. This second kind of false guru is especially dangerous—they have a clear agenda that impacts anyone who is vulnerable and seeking. This faction is illustrated well in the caricature of a particular kind of yoga teacher—I have seen some version of this guy in a variety of places and faces. He is a persona and an archetype and he could just as easily be a fundamentalist teacher of any tradition, but in this case he wears tank tops rather than business suits or clericals as his uniform of swindling. I came across one recently when I landed in his yoga class without knowing his history or previously experiencing his false