142 SACREd WOundS The anthropologist, philosopher, and decipher of myths Joseph Campbell would say it is because the story speaks not just to the story of one man, but because to every man and woman—illuminating the inherent struggle of humanity. Joseph Campbell believed that all stories, be they religious parables or contemporary cinema, tell all our stories over and over. He calls this “the hero’s journey.” When I see Shawshank Redemption, I am reminded of this hero’s journey, and this is why I share it with all of my clients. The clip I show is near the end of the movie when the protagonist, Andy Dufresne, frees himself from the prison of his own rage, resentment, and guilt by chipping away, year after year, at the concrete walls of his cell until he reaches the path out. Andy’s friend “Red” narrates his escape path, saying, “Andy crawled to freedom through 500 yards of shit smelling foulness I can’t even imagine, or maybe I just don’t want to. Five hundred yards. That’s the length of five football fields, just shy of half a mile.” The scene ends with him exiting the tunnel of crap, stripping bare his prison clothes, and standing in the midst of rain and lightning with his hands spread wide as he looked up to the sky, into the heavens. The reason I show this clip is because the road out of trauma and suffering is like the miles of waste that Andy Dufresne crawled through. The question of our lives is: Are we willing to crawl out of the crap and into freedom, or do we sit in the sludge or behind the prison walls of our pain forever? This is where the choice comes in. This is where we decide who we are in the mythology of our own lives. Interestingly, the film is an adaptation of a novella written by Stephen king titled Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption. I say “interesting” because Stephen king was a survivor of childhood trauma, which I learned in graduate school when reading a book by psychiatrist Lenore Terr about the impact of childhood trauma on the life and personal mythology of those who survive terrible things in their early lives. Much like Joseph Campbell, although she doesn’t use the same language set, Terr believes we tell the stories of our pain in our lives, and our myths will follow us. She explored the relationship between Stephen king’s own childhood trauma and his experience of writing stories of horror (and sometimes healing). To me, Shawshank Redemption is one of king’s best stories of surmounting the horror to find freedom.