ADDENDUM Finding a Mental Health Provider to Support Your Healing from Religious Injury, Spiritual Abuse, and/or Church-Hurt This is a question I get often. Since religious injury is not yet a commonly known or understood manifestation of trauma, when I speak on this issue or even on trauma in general, people ask how to access the most effective and trained provider. They want to find someone specific to religious injury, someone who will understand the unique nature of this specific hurting experience. The following are some basic tips to get you started on the road to finding a provider right for you. Even with a narrow scope like religious injury, each person may be suited to different kinds of providers, so this will vary per person in some ways, but there are some basic tips to help you on your way—regardless of your specific healing journey and fingerprint of recovery. 1. Make sure the provider is adequately credentialed and certified in counseling. You want to make sure he or she is a master’s level clinician or above in a field of therapy or counseling. The major fields of clinical therapy practice include psychology, psychiatry (although psychiatrists are usually medical doctors whose main function is prescribing mental health medication; a select few provide counseling), social work, marriage and family therapy, counseling psychology, and mental health counseling. Also make sure he or she is licensed in the state he or she practices 166 FINDING A MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDER 167 in. You can also check the record of every licensed professional in your state through the state’s licensing website to make sure the licensure status is in good standing—meaning, there are no any pending charges for issues related to client care. 2. Check to see if his or her Psychology Today profile and/ or website lists trauma and PTSD as one of the areas of specialty. This does not guarantee he or she is an expert in traumatology, but if it is referenced, there is a better chance he or she has a minimal working knowledge of trauma. It is good to know not everyone who mentions trauma in their therapy biographical information is a trauma expert—many may have a generalist’s ability to treat trauma, and many will not have any direct practice with religious injury and spiritual abuse as an area of practice. This doesn’t mean this is not a good fit for you—it is just important to go into your consultation with a provider with a reasonable expectation of his or her abilities and knowledge about religious-oriented trauma. 3. Imagine your first session with a provider as a job interview for that person. You have no obligation to commit to a provider just because he or she has met with you—you are the person who decides what is best for your care. Trauma survivors tend to be “yes” people as a method of self-protection, but you need to know you have the option of choice here. Have a list of questions you want to ask. A few sample questions are: How much of your practice involves treating trauma and PTSD as the primary diagnosis? How many years have you been treating trauma? What therapeutic interventions do you use specifically for traumatic stress? Have you had any experience with religious trauma/injury specifically? If so, in what way? How do you treat religious injury and spiritual abuse? Are there any differences between treating this trauma and other traumas? How comfortable are you with addressing this issue in counseling? 4. Find resources outside of your local area. While you might find a therapist who is a good fit in your area, it may be unlikely he or she has extensive experience with religious injury or traumatic experience. What can supplement that gap can be accessing resources, which are outside of your local resources—books, websites, online religious hurt forums, and specialists.