CHAPTER 5 Wisdom Teachers Versus False Gurus Save one life, you save the world. — Torah The original sin of faith communities, leaders, or members who harm others with unloving doctrine distorts the idea of faith, God, and love. It creates a dogma of dysfunction, which then, injury by injury, taints these terms for those who they hurt. In the same way that any family abuse makes it difficult for a person to trust, so religious abuse dismantles all the same factors in both faith and literal family contexts. It is important to understand that although the sting of religious injury is strong, it doesn’t inherently mean all faith is injurious—the same way an abusive family experience doesn’t mean all families are abusive. That said, there is no obligation to return to faith community after hurt—for some it is too difficult. In the steps to healing. we will explore what people choose to do after being wounded by religion. It is important, like with family abuse of any kind, to discern what is healthy and unhealthy in a spiritual or religious community, especially for those who have only experienced the abusive faith “parent.” What might seem obvious to someone who has a healthy frame of reference is not always so for those who have seen little to no healthy love and family modeled for them. Additionally, although we discuss examples from the Christian tradition—primarily because that is what my own request for hurt stories turned up—there are dangerous and insidious abuses in a 91 92 SACREd WOundS variety of traditions. I have seen leaders or spiritual “parents” who are very harmful in all manner of tradition—even in yoga communities I have taken part in, and as I learned from my Buddhist teacher. The great danger of power-abuser leaders, especially when bound to spirituality, is that they take what we want the most—meaning, belonging, and understanding—and twist it to feed their ego and need to be important. Like any abuser, they can see the vulnerabilities in people and are able to hone in on those people most in need of support and guidance, and use it to their advantage. Sadly, I have seen that kind of abuse in the most subtle and extreme forms everywhere. We all want meaning, purpose, and belonging in our lives, so without the ability to discern safe from unsafe spiritual leadership, we all can become vulnerable. In Southeast Florida, where I currently live, there is an overwhelmingly large addiction recovery community. Something about palm trees and sunny winters created a phenomenon long ago where addiction treatment centers began heading southbound to set up their facilities in the Sunshine State. As a result, there is an extensive community of people just exiting addiction treatment living in halfway houses or independently. On any given day at any hour, you can find an AA or NA meeting somewhere within a five-mile radius of my house. In a later chapter, I will discuss the benefits of the Twelve Steps, recovery, culture, and community, but for the purposes of this chapter I am going to discuss how religious and spiritually oriented systems can manifest both the good (wisdom teacher) and the bad (false guru). This does not make a system of spirituality bad—it just means we must be watchful for all the likely places that predators, abusers, or power-hungry people might show up. People in early recovery, especially those really willing to change their life and give their will up to a power greater than themselves, are both especially ready for transformative spirituality and particularly vulnerable to what I call the “false guru” (guru in Sanskrit means teacher). In this world, there are “wisdom teachers,” and there are “false gurus.” knowing the difference between the two makes the difference between being abused for the sake of someone else’s ego and finding a transformative path of healing and healthy spirituality. Unfortunately, even the healthiest people can’t always know which kind of person they are encountering until they are hurt by that