EPILOGUE The Cracks Are Where the Light Gets In Woundedness and Transformation I opened this book and my story with an exploration of wounding in a Buddhist context, which led me, through hurt, back to the painful hurt from my church context. Conversely, one of the most powerfully mystic and healing experience of devout faith and human relationship came to me again through a Buddhist lens. But, if I think about it, in truth it was just through an authentically human lens. While my basement teachings had led to a bit of a Buddhist cult, it also set me into the paradox of most of my experience of faith and faith practice. I greatly loved much of the teachings and context inherent to Buddhism and the Buddhist perspective. It resonated with the contemplative mindset I began in Buddhist teachings and then explored further in a Christian contemplative context. After graduate school I planned a month-long solo backpacking trip to Thailand and Laos—not just because of my amorous feelings toward the Eastern philosophical lens but also due to the ease of traversing this area of the world as a single female. As was customary for my travels, I managed to get a sizeable sinus infection along my journey, so that once I made my way from Bangkok, to the northern city Chiang Mai and west to the Burmese border, I was very sick. 162 THE CRACkS ARE WHERE THE LIGHT GETS IN 163 Boarding a plane headed for Luang Prabang, Laos, I was feeling the feverish, with sweat pouring off my brow in the tireless monsoon heat. I found my way with a Brit and a Scot I had met on the plane to a guesthouse made of erratic plywood siding, just a block up the hill from the Mekong River. For three dollars a day and with a pounding headache, I was glad just to have a mattress and a fan. The guesthouse was owned by “Mama,” or that is what she asked everyone to call her. I remember that she had a bag like Mary Poppins did, and it held everything from Band-Aids® to spare bananas, all to be offered to her guests for whatever need they might have. As my delirium increased, and the local pharmacy did not contain the antibiotics I needed to begin to cure my illness, Mama became very concerned for my well-being. Much of my last two days in Luang Prabang was spent with Mama reaching in her bag looking for just the right aid for what ailed me. In translation, Luang Prabang means “the Royal Buddha image,” and it is a UNESCO World Heritage site both for its French colonial architecture at the city center and the abundance of Buddhist temples all throughout the city. If you are up early enough in the morning, you can see the monks seeking alms along the cobble stone streets of the town. Mama was a devout Buddhist and went to temple daily. On the day I left, headed by plane for the Southern Thailand island of ko Tao via ko Samui, headed toward antibiotics and beaches, Mama came into my room to say goodbye. There are a rare few moments whose positive influence can have as deeply lasting effects and clarity as the traumatic ones. I know this from my own life and from hearing the stories of suffering for most of my professional life. This, however, was one of those positive influence moments so sacred to me that it lives as a burning exception to that rule. I remember everything about that moment, down to the temperature, sound, and lighting specific to that memory. Mama walks in, and the fan is blowing loudly—shaking from the intensity of breeze from its perch near the ceiling. The sound was like a whizz and a thud; it was so clear because the guesthouse was otherwise nearly silent—everyone was out exploring the town. It was mid-day, but it felt like dusk in the space—the only light inside was through the spaces and slats where the plywood room walls had been nailed together unevenly.