16 SACREd WOundS This was said as a matter of fact. Even a murderer headed for death row has a jury take longer to dole out a sentence. “But that doesn’t make any sense,” I persisted foolishly, “You are saying that if someone is a serial killer and becomes Christian before they die, then they go to heaven, but Gandhi doesn’t? Just like that?” The counselors answered in unison, “Yes.” “I mean, I don’t have a problem with the criminal going to heaven, but I can’t believe Gandhi wouldn’t be there too.” The silence between our sentences was so acute you could hear each leaf that rustled and each bit of dirt that was trodden. “Teresa, you have to believe this. This is what Christianity means and this is what Jesus said. If you don’t believe this then you aren’t a true Christian. If you don’t believe this then you haven’t truly allowed Jesus in your heart. You have to believe this. If you don’t, well you just can’t call yourself Christian.” This was the moment. This was the moment my heart broke. I had never even considered that there were disqualifying factors to my goodness and Godness; I didn’t know there was fine print that was non-negotiable. I wasn’t even sure I believed the ultimatum but just the shred of that possibility, that I could not really be Christian slipped into my consciousness and could not be unwritten. But I was stubborn. I figured if I was going down with the ship I might as well go down fighting for what I believed, even if, as it turned out, what I believed and who I was wasn’t really Christian anymore. I wanted to do what felt right—even if this experience and the answers given to me led me, in the years that followed, to question everything I inherently believed was true about God and faith and Christianity. So I persisted. “Well I don’t believe that. I don’t know what that says about me, but I won’t believe that good people go to Hell. That is not a God I would believe in; one that would let that happen.” The silence began to feel eternal, and the distance between me and the others in the group widened with each step, until I felt like the dark might swallow me up. I felt like I would be lost forever in those Missouri woods. At this point, the gaggle of girls following the counselors step-for-step began to move even farther away from me like a slowly receding wave; these girls who had called me friend and sister just a bonfire, THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 17 a zip-line, and two friendship bracelets ago. I was carrying some foreign germ nobody wanted to catch; as if this kind of radical cosmic inclusivity could be caught like a cold or the stomach flu. They knew from the tones in the counselors’ voice that they did not want to catch whatever aberration I had. It meant alienation, isolation, and possibly the eradication of God’s love and happy heavenly home for all eternity. This was no light sneeze. And, from what little I knew about the rapidly disintegrating conversation, this was definitely no way to end a pep rally. In the matter of half a mile and a few short words, I had unraveled their pep and was slipping into a potential pit of eternal damnation. As we reached the cabin doors, the girls all rushed inside and away from me. The counselors instructed them to get ready for bed, letting them know that we (meaning me and the two counselors) would be out on the porch for a while. For what felt like all night but was certainly a couple of hours or more, I was sucked into this void of competing eternities. The counselors repeated more of the same conversation and I did as well— they tried to save my soul and pull me back from my dance with damnation. We both refused to budge. By the end of the night we, both sides, gave up from exhaustion. They felt the defeat of my un-rung bell for Jesus, and I felt the wave of indecision, not certain I wanted to have anything to do with Jesus if these were the kind of people he hung out with and these are the kind of ideals to live up to. I wanted to do what was just, even if it rescinded my all-access pass through the pearly gates. While I can be flip about it now, in the moment it genuinely felt like, based on their night-long interrogation, that those were the options. Part of me thought they were insane. Another part of me felt as if I might have just given away my Christianity for my conscience. I felt lonely on the porch and for the rest of camp. Friendship bracelets and hugs kept flowing, but my cabin-mates and I knew we were on different sides of a very thin line. After this, the minutes, hours, and days at camp served to build and well up in me hate for everything they did and stood for in relation to myself. Every moment felt disingenuous. It was only meant to bolster those on the inside of their version of faith, and there was an exclusion for all those (especially myself) who fell outside of their indoctrination. 18 SACREd WOundS I never quite believed the Patriarch, the counselors, or the girls who thought I had acquired some kind of cosmic cooties, but I didn’t entirely disbelieve them either. I thought if this was truth, then I was outside of it—all happening at a really young age to imagine life outside of a perceived cosmic truth. It made me lonely, but it also made me very angry. I was angry that the vision I had of God, born somewhere deep inside in unending love, had been torn open and broken apart. I was angry that what they were saying wasn’t true, about Christianity being this alienating belief system, and that they were perpetuating a lie. I was equally angry that it was a system of alienation, isolation, and bigoted negation, and that perhaps that indwelling face of God I had loved since I could remember was just a myth of my own invention. I spent decades festering with hate. The girl I was got older and became pubescent and pimply, a high school graduate and retail worker, and a woman leaving home for the Colorado Rockies, but all the while I carried my festering hate with me. I hated the campfire girls and their fleeting promises of friendship, quickly lost. I hated the camp counselors who isolated and bullied me for that long, lonely night. I hated the pep rally leaders and the camp patriarch and all of their megaphone chants. I hated the song, “Stand By Me.” I hated. I hated. I hated. That hate, born on a sticky hot summer night in 1995 fueled me for over a decade. I ran fire hot on that gas; I charged toward anything standing in opposition of my Christian roots and anything I wouldn’t want to share in a confessional booth. I ran. I ran. I ran. At the end of the line, exhausted by fighting, beleaguered from running, I was tired of my spiritually homeless runaway life. I knew I had to face the demons created that night. I had to stop running. I had to stop hating. I had to stop holding everyone, including myself, up to a divine barometer that no human could ever equal. What I needed to convert was not my “wrong” theology, as the counselors would have liked in that long cabin night, but my broken, bent, and anguished heart. Getting right with God and myself meant going back to the cabin and seeing everything and everyone for what they were in that moment. Those girls were scared preteens, just like me, taught to abide by an ethic I was betraying. They were taught there were divine penalties THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 19 for any aberration from their teachings. As girls like myself, their fears were proportional to their understanding of the world. Those teen counselors were girls too; only older than I by a few inches and bra sizes. They were doing what they thought to be right. Those camp leaders, with their megaphones and simple alluring pep... well, we will deal with them a little bit later in the book. The accountability and clemency on this one is a bit more complex, and relates to the larger continuum of this story—the nature of wounding and healing. The crux of the intention behind returning to the scene of my scarring, back to the cabin years and miles of rage later, is part of a process often used in trauma therapy. We return to the places of our deepest wounds when we are ready, to see the scene with new eyes; in my case. the preteens, teens, adults, and even myself. On the other side of hate, through the eyes of an adult me, one seeking healing and ready to let go of the years of spiritual baggage, I could see the vulnerability in everyone. I could see the fear. I could see the good intentions even in the wake of bad actions. It doesn’t eradicate accountability. It doesn’t eliminate the imprint of hurt it left on my heart. It just allows me to see the humanity in the whole experience, and through my humanity to let go of my resentments. It allows me to let go of the hold the past carries on my present. It allows me to see people with the empathy and kindness I wish I had been shown that night and on others like it, where religion was branded on me like a ranch hand cattle, instead of a warm blanket and loving embrace. This is the means that helped me find my way back from hate and resentment. This is the path that stopped me from running and let me stare my past in the face, unafraid and no longer bitter. This is a template to the ways in which we can all, at our greatest potential in our shining moments, deal with everyone we disagree with theologically, philosophically, and religiously. This is the blueprint for a future built on healed and hallowed grounds, rather than emotional battlefields and rubble-filled churches. At one time or another, we have been the abuser, the person so certain of our truth that we would mock and demean any other variation. At one time or another, we have been the abused, diminished and negated for speaking or being our own truth. We all need the healing and penance. Reflecting on my pre-adolescent spiritual experiences and 20 SACREd WOundS wounding at “kamp” does not mean this experience by itself formed my annexation and isolation from church culture. There were other instances. Over time, there were other spiritual slights, hypocrisies, and inconsistencies added, log by log, to the fire of my own rage and indignation. I tell the story above because it articulates the beginning of my doubt in Christianity and my frustration with human beings in human religious institutions, and it marked the first step in a decade of jading and disillusionment with Christianity. This is the experience that begins my own path of spiritual fragmentation and empathy for all those who wander spiritually. I tell the story because it is a too-common tale. I hear many stories of religious wounding as a therapist and minister for spiritual seekers and the spiritually wounded, and as teacher of the mystics and mystic traditions. Sadly, my story did not happen in a vacuum limited to that camp and night in Midwest America. I made a pact with myself on my road back to love, hope, and faith in Christianity (on my and its best of days) as a two-pronged promise: • Never again would I give an institution the deed to my faith. I found I could participate in a system, without the system itself owning my beliefs, my heart, or my soul. • I would never let one human’s words ever have tyrannical rule over my soul. I have found that as long as my faith—personal, fragile, and vulnerable—is not run by any institution or people group, then my heart can stay focused on God, Christ, and Holy Spirit, and I can take human fallibility for what it is (mine and others)—a necessary ingredient in the journey, even and especially when it hurts. As long as I kept these promises to myself, I knew I could exist within my religious context and my Christianity without any one experience or person taking down the private altar of my sacred place. Trauma, up Close Trauma is anything that injures the self—the heart and the soul. This may not be the diagnostic definition, but it is certainly the one I have encountered most often when seeing the wounds of trauma in the eyes of the thousands of people I have treated in both secular THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 21 and sacred contexts who have experienced wounds that reverberate in the whole self. Sadly, clinical definitions always pale in comparison to the real-life experience of any whole-person malady. Trauma is hurt that we feel from the tips of our toes to the top of our head—it hurts everywhere. When we think of traumatic experience in this context, there is almost nothing that can be negated as trauma. It is all up to the personal perception and is entirely subjective. Who are we, whether doctors or clinicians or any other helping professional, to be the determining factor in how deep or authentic a wound is felt by another person? You define trauma and traumatic stress for yourself. I can give you scales and measures to quantify your hurt, and these can help, but ultimately, hurt is beyond measurement and trauma beyond scientific calculation. That being said, I will offer some parameters so you might discern your own hurt in the context of traumatic experience. Before we go into any of the semantics, I want to validate your hurt. If you have been negatively impacted by others’ actions or the experiences you had inside a religious or spiritual context, I am so sorry. I am terribly sorry the places, spaces, and faces who were supposed to show you the ultimate expression of love showed you something negating. Any institution or belief system that does not value who you are as a person deserves to be scrutinized, because the reflection of love you have been given has been tainted by all the worst parts of humanity— fear, narcissism, neurosis, paranoia, and aggression. If your experience of religious constructs has negated who you are as a person—be it your gender, your sexuality, your life choices, or your independent thinking—I am so sorry. While I can’t know the particulars of your pain, I know the pain of negation, abuse, and hurt, through both the personal and professional lenses of my own life. I am so sorry that you carry that hurt in your heart. It is a heavy, often isolating, and sometimes deadly burden. I am so sorry you have had to experience this pain. I am even more sorry if you had to handle it alone until now. Part of this book’s intention is to create a forum to give voice to religious hurts and wounds, to explore their nature, and to validate the often silent suffering of so many. It is also to give professional validation of this personal wound, and to provide the beginnings of the road back from this hurt. 22 SACREd WOundS The DNA of Trauma Trauma is in the eye of the beholder. While some myths about trauma needing to fit a certain set of criteria still linger in and around the field of psychology and traumatology (the study of trauma and the practice of trauma-conscious interventions), more and more therapy professionals and laypersons are finding agreement that trauma is a subjective concept. What is acutely painful to one person does not inherently carry the same weight of suffering for someone else. This wider definition of traumatic experience also allows us, in the traumatology field and beyond, to look at the world of trauma through a much wider lens. As it relates to the experience of emotional, psychological, and spiritual pain of what we call sacred wounds or spiritual injury, trauma in a religious context can be seen as any painful experience perpetrated by family, friends, community members, or institutions inside of a religion. Often religious injury can happen at all levels of human relationship, which may be one of the reasons it is so powerfully damaging. One’s own family, friends, community members, and institutions simultaneously can perpetuate it. From sexual abuse to negation of one’s own identity (as a woman, a gay person, etc.), trauma inside of religion is often perpetrated simultaneously by one individual, and often the community group or institution at the same time. A simple (but painful) example is a person who is found out to be LGBTQ inside of a fundamentalist religious tradition, which sees queer identity as a flaw, failure, or even sin. The institution created the dogma, the community perpetuates this belief, and often a person’s own family and friends enforce this belief and force this shaming ideology onto their loved one. Perhaps the most difficult part is it is often done in the “best” interest of the person who is being hurt and traumatized. This is also perhaps the hardest and most intractable part of religious wounds—that the perpetrators believe in the “rightness” of their hurtful convictions to the far reaches of omniscience and back. Finally, however, people who have been wounded, those who have a history with wounding traditions or dogmas, and the general public are able to see this kind of injury for what it is, true trauma that often manifests into post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). For any trauma survivor, there is a potential for the traumatic experience to get “stuck” in which case it moves from a lived experience into a THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 23 condition known as PTSD. General study data shows that about 20 percent of people who experience trauma will experience PTSD. That being said, due to the underreporting of traumatic issues (sometimes because people don’t believe their traumatic pain qualifies as trauma and other times just because of the inherent shame in much of the pain of PTSD), it is difficult to calculate the exact percentage of traumatized people who experience PTSD. Additionally, due to the fact that there has been no comprehensive study of religious or spiritual trauma and abuse or its vast spectrum of injuries, there is no way to know how many people who experience this kind of hurt will develop PTSD. Anecdotally, however, from my own study of the experience and stories of religious hurt in the last couple of years, I would say that very few of the people I have spoken with haven’t experienced some variety of traumatic stress, anxiety, and depression related to their wounds. Part of the intention of this book is to give voice to those who have been hurting for years, often afraid of alienation, annexation, or worse, harm to themselves or their loved ones, related to speaking up about their traumatic experiences. Another impetus for this book is to let people know, both those who have experienced religious trauma and those who have not, that this is a valid form of traumatization. For reasons we will explore in some of the forthcoming chapters, there are a variety of reasons why this kind of trauma is very complex and deeply devastating. If you have been suffering from this kind of hurt, you can know from this moment forward that your hurt is valid and as deeply traumatic as you feel it is. Your experience is valid, and your hurt is real. Additionally, as we will explore in future chapters, there is also real potential for a path toward healing and a spiritual or moral journey through pain into something like freedom, hope, and joy. As real as your pain is, so equally is your potential to heal. If you choose to seek it but are not ready for the healing journey, then that is ok, too. We all heal in our own time, and we all have the autonomy to choose not to go down that path. I want you to have the autonomy to say, “no,” as it is likely if you have moved through the experience of religious trauma or any trauma, then “no” has not been a word accessible to you for too long. This book is a journey. It is an option. It is a choice. You decide what to do with it and how it might serve you. With the increased understanding in the field of psychology as to the depth and breadth of trauma and posttraumatic stress 24 SACREd WOundS disorder, there are also a few other concepts that have appeared that are important to understand at the beginning of this journey, so as to better see the path to healing and wholeness. Healing begins with understanding. I have found that to be true in my own journey from hurt to healing, out of my own traumatic experience and PTSD, and with the hundreds of clients I have worked with over the last decade walking that same path. Information is great power. So at the beginning of this book, I offer you the resources of knowledge about trauma, its many versatile facets, religious trauma specifically, and what science and therapy professionals are beginning to understand about traumatic experience that is providing a wider pathway to healing and wholeness. The Different Dimensions of Traumatic Experience Traumatic response is a complex set of responses of the body and brain systems working together with the best of intentions. When they work for us, or as they were intended, our body and mind seek to protect us from danger. In our prehistoric lives, that danger would have been very real and physically immediate. In this way, the origin of our traumatic response system is much like our animal brethren. The example I use most frequently is a prey animal in the wild. Imagine a deer in the forest. It has to become alert when sounds immediately erupt in the distance and be prepared to freeze or flee at a moment’s notice. In much the same way, our body and brain respond to perceived danger in the same way. We are training from our internal system outward toward a variety of responses—fight, flight, freeze, or submit. In recent years, one additional method of response has become more visible as well, perhaps a manifestation of the complex human nature toward compassion. It is called tend-and-befriend. We will go into further detail for each of these responses shortly, but when activated appropriately and when there is real danger in our lives, these survival responses helps us to respond in crisis situations. When this survival response is over-stimulated—when it experiences a single or multiple incidence of trauma—it becomes stuck, like a light switch that has been turned on and then jammed in place. When this happens, the brain and body can’t distinguish between an immediate threat and a previous threat because the survival response addresses safety and danger from the same overstimulated stance. We will explore in the chapter ahead the many ways this THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 25 manifests in a person, but simply put, traumatic stress and PTSD become the survival response stuck in place. Part of the process of healing from trauma, religious or otherwise, is understanding the mechanisms that create trauma in order to begin to rewire the stuck system. Traumatic Survival Responses Fight is the body and mind responding to danger (or perceived danger) by engaging with it with violence or aggression. This could be nonverbally, verbally, and/or physically. In working with combat veterans, I saw this response in overdrive often; my clients who exhibited this regularly were seen as aggressors but, in truth, in PTSD the person often sees danger everywhere so, unconsciously, their fight response is just that—a response to a perceived threat. Like all trauma responses, this can be worked on, reduced, and even eradicated, but understanding the response and its source is important to beginning to rewire the brain/body system. In religious trauma I see this in the pessimistic or aggressive (usually verbal or written) way people react to others in faith communities. But again, if this is coming from a place of trauma, it is a reflexive response to perceived danger. understanding this mechanism as a response to perceived threat is crucial to changing this response for the survivor. For those responding to the emotionally and spiritually wounded person, it is essential to understand and begin to act from a space of empathy, sensitivity, and patience rather than from a mutual stance of attack. Flight is the body and mind response to danger (or perceived danger), which manifests as some form of escape from the dangerous stimuli. This could be literally fleeing like we would if we were being chased by someone and we ran the other way, or a more nuanced and subtle flight when a person emotionally escapes or creates barriers to relationship with others. Flight in religious trauma can manifest in a variety of interpersonal ways. It might be seen in someone who moves through a large variety of traditions or religions after leaving the faith community that hurt them and who may vacate a new community when there is perceived danger or hurt experience on the horizon. It could also manifest as a general avoidance of religious contexts or in a pattern of leaving or extracting themselves from discussions or persons related to religion. The difficulty of this process is that a person is not able to stay still long enough to find out if a place, 26 SACREd WOundS person, tradition, or community group has positive and trustworthy qualities. It can become a constant state of flight, which is both exhausting and doesn’t allow for the ability to deepen into practice, relationship, or community. For the survivor to understand this phenomenon means there is a possibility, when ready, to test one’s threshold for staying still long enough to determine the difference between actual and perceived danger, and to tolerate some level of difference and conflict, which exists everywhere, as a way of learning to build more complex and rich relationships with people and communities (sacred or secular). For those not wounded—rather than minimizing the hurt and seeing the avoidance or “bouncing” from groups and traditions as some flaw of superficiality and lack of depth— they can understand it for what it is, truly deep hurt manifesting in a fear response. The last thing we should ever do with someone’s fear response is invalidate and minimize it. Once people can learn to approach those fleeing faith spaces differently, dialogue between faith spaces and the wounded could be possible. The freeze response as a survival mechanism is often physicalized, but it can be emotional as well. In the wild it would be the deer in the forest that stops moving when it hears a noise; for a child of abuse, it might be holding one’s breath and staying still when an abusive parent or caregiver is near. Freeze is the response often used when fight or flight seem inaccessible due to the largeness of the threat. It can also relate to dissociation in the sense of someone becoming numb to their body and emotions. In religious trauma contexts, this can be a response used by people who feel they cannot leave their tradition or family traumatic environment and so find ways to partially “shut off” their mind and body in the abusive contexts. The trouble with this response is, as Brene Brown says in her vulnerability work, “We can’t selectively numb,” and so we numb what frightens us, but then the numbness can begin to infect even the good parts of life until feeling anything is difficult and being connected to body, mind, and the whole life experience is less possible. For the survivor of traumatic experience, this reaction can be diminished by increased intention and attention to staying present in moments of safety, which can include practices interacting with the world in a very present-centered way. For persons working or living with survivors of religious trauma, it is helpful to understand their threshold for stress, sensitivities, and triggers, as well as to be able to help ground THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 27 them in the present when they begin to freeze or become not present in any given moment. The worst thing you can do to someone having this stress response is to press or pressure them further into their place of discomfort. Building comfort and safety is paramount for a survivor to feel safe enough to stay present in any given moment. The submit/appease response is creating no tension or conflict and moving with instead of against the aggressor or dangerous element. It is a bit like moving with the tide of the ocean rather than trying to swim against the current. As a stress response, it can be an effective way not to agitate whether the dangerous element is a person, system, or community group. This can also be a way to stay safe in an unhealthy or cult-like faith group in which being different from the crowd could isolate someone as a threat to the system, and thereby create a dangerous situation for that person. Like most stress responses, it is very effective in dangerous situations but can create a pattern of response in daily life that can lead to staying with unhealthy people or groups. It thereby makes the protection method actually a vulnerability because the person was never taught to internally or externally get out of situations that might be unhealthy or even dangerous. When you move out of unhealthy relationships, especially religious or communal contexts, it is just more familiar. Like the devil we know, but more the devil we become accustomed to, it is difficult to leave what we know, even and sometimes especially when it is harmful. We don’t mean to repeat those old traumatic patterns, but we do—we are repetitious creatures. So for survivors, it is important to be vigilant of relationships after traumatic experience, religious or otherwise. Often the support of a therapist can help filter through the information about people or people groups to help you form healthy relationships in all aspects of life. It can be hard work, especially when someone has held the protective posture of appeasing those who might hurt them, but it is possible. Tend-and-befriend is the most recently discovered defense mechanism for someone in survival mode or trauma response. Tend-and-befriend is associated with the hormone oxytocin, which has also been called the “bonding hormone” and creates connection between humans. In the best of circumstances, it builds healthy relationships, contributes to the bond during and after birth between a mother and her child, and generally helps us connect with others. Unfortunately, like all the survival responses, it can also be turned against us in 28 SACREd WOundS distress, or in the case of PTSD, in distress that has been frozen in place. It can lead to feelings of dependency and emotional reliance on potentially hurtful persons, environments, and community groups. Much like with the concept of Stockholm Syndrome or in the Honeymoon phase of domestic violence, a person will feel connected and emotionally bound to even the most difficult situations, persons, or people groups. For persons with this particular survival mechanism, again like with appeasement, there may be the need for external help in identifying these patterns of affection and behavior. It is best for a person or community group engaging with someone who has the tend-and-befriend survival mechanism to help that person set boundaries, sometimes by pointing out the need for a boundary or by creating those boundaries on your side of the relationship—with love and acceptance but also a strength to keeping the set boundaries. It will help that person and the relationship in the long run. The Many Mansions of the Heart Teresa of Avila, the Spanish mystic after whom I was named twice, wrote a book in the 1500s titled The Interior Castle, which describes the mansions of the soul. She believed that the soul had many layers and each layer she described as a mansions, or rooms inside the castle of self. She also believed we entered each of these places through the doorway of suffering—something she knew well as a person who suffered extensive medical issues and pain, as well as the disappointing ache of being an activist and reformer of her monastic tradition during a time (the Crusades) when doing such a thing was a deadly endeavor. Through dying, we are reborn. Through pain, we are given access to a new doorway or mansion to the heart and soul. The suffering we experience in trauma is initially responded to by the system described above—one of primal survivalism. If we can see it as such and begin to work to move beyond just a survival life, our pain can be a doorway to a new mansion of ourselves—a deeper space of heart, mind, and spirit. I wish suffering wasn’t the doorway to depth and knowing and awakening, but it is the way we were made. It is through the death of something in us that we are reborn. It is through the pain that we have access to something that a superficial life story will never give us access to. Our heart, body, and soul have many mansions. When we move through the pain, we still wrestle THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 29 with it, but we do it from this wise place—one that knows what it is like to be in primal survival and what it is like to try to survive the wilds of suffering, but one that also has been able to touch on the depths of understanding, compassion, and self beyond one individual life. When we experience trauma and pain, we join the lineage of a great many mystics, healers, wisdom teachers, and hope-bearers who found their way to wisdom through the experience of the worst of the world. This is our lineage—we can claim it, own it, and be empowered by the eternal truth that pain carries us to the deepest places where experiential wisdom is born. There is a story of Teresa of Avila wrestling quite literally with her relationship with GodOne night she set out on mule, in the dark. She almost always traveled by mule and by night because she was without extensive funds for her revolutionary monasticism mission, and she was in constant danger by daylight—where enemies of her work might harm her. At nighttime, she’s on a mule, and it is raining as she sets out on the rolling hillside of Spain to travel from her home monastery to another city where she was working to set up a new monastic community. The mule missteps, and she goes flying into the muddy, wet earth. Covered in mud, cold, wet, and seriously pissed off, she shouts into sky (paraphrasing), “Seriously?! Seriously?! All that I am doing—why? Really, why?” To which God is said to have replied, “This is how I treat my friends.” With the famous sarcastic cleverness this fiery mystic is known for, she replied, “And that is why you have so few.” With that she got back off the ground, on her mule, perhaps as galvanized by her anger to continue her journey as by anything else. We can see this parable of persistence as a reminder that hurt can derail us, and difficulty can make the road we need to travel seem impossible and unending. It’s stormy, muddy, and exhausting at times. But there is something sacred about the muddy places—it is the space where we prove who we are—infinite beings, capable of the impossible. You are an infinite being, capable of the impossible. Curse at the heavens; riot against the muddy road. We have to—but we don’t have to stay on the ground in the muck. We are capable of the impossible—even when it seems even God him/her/themselves is on a mission to inconvenience, perturb, and injure—that is not the whole story. Hope is a relationship. Faith is a relationship. Grace is a relationship. Believe in yourself, and who knows where that belief can take you. Always remember that even in the darkest night, you 30 SACREd WOundS are still capable of the impossible. Trauma is a muddy, rainy, sacred road. It may anger you enough to make you get up, at first, out of spite, but whatever the origin is, it is the impetus to keep riding that gets us to new places, spaces, and new mansions of our heart, mind and spirit. Scream into the sky. Rage into the rain. Do what you have to do (especially in the beginning of healing) to get back up on that mule and ride it into the next chapter of your healing. A HEALING PRACTICE: Grounding in the Present Moment Life in traumatic experience can feel like a tornado—wild and untethered. Part of healing from what injures us is being able to create a safe distance from the thoughts and feelings that can overwhelm a person living in traumatic experience or suffering from traumatic stress. Even the body itself can often feel overloaded—almost as if buzzing on a high frequency. Breath, as we explored in the Introduction’s contemplative practice, becomes the gateway to calming and soothing overstrained nerves and an overtaxed nervous system (which is what trauma does to the body and brain—overloads it). Once you have begun to access a slow and steady breathing pattern, as is taught in the three-part breath practice, you can begin to more wholly ground yourself— so that in the tornado-like moments you have some way to ground yourself in the present. The following is a very simple practice, which integrates the breath of the Introduction’s practice with a simple tool for grounding yourself—mind, body and spirit—in the present. Whenever you feel overwhelmed, this can be used as an extension of the breath practice to help you stay centered in the eye of the storm that is trauma and suffering, rather than be carried away. If you regularly find yourself in these moments of ungrounding, fear, panic, anger, or aggression, you can add an object as your grounding object or point of focus— maybe a smooth rock you keep in your pocket or something that carries significance to you, which you can carry without anyone else noticing. This is up to you. 1. Wherever you are, become aware of your surroundings. Where are you sitting or standing in this moment? 2. If it is possible, begin to engage with some part of your three-part breath. Even if this just means breathing in your nose and out THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 31 of your mouth, begin to engage with this practice of intentional breathing. 3. Begin to feel your surroundings. Touch whatever is closest to you—this might be the case of your cellphone, the object nearest to you, even the fabric of your clothes. 4. Notice the texture and dimensions of this object in front of you, as you continue to intentionally breathe through the moment of stress. Is the object (your clothing, phone, something nearest to you) jagged or smooth, rough or textured? Notice how it feels. If you have a grounding object, pay attention to the dimensions of that. 5. You will have memories, thoughts, and feelings flutter through your mind. You will have ideas, worries, or concerns begin to crowd your brain and tense your body. This will happen. This is part of the human struggle. Your goal is to 1) not attach to any one thought, feeling, or sensation, 2) return to breath as a way to ground in the moment, and 3) return back to the object you are using as your point of grounding. 6. Feel the breath moving through your lungs and then begin to ground your whole body in the present moment. 7. Continue to breathe and ground with your object of your choice— that which you carry with you or just something, anything, in your environment—a railing, a chair, the earth beneath your feet, a chair beneath your body. Be present with how it feels to sit; stand, and be wherever you are in that moment. Feel your feet in the ground, your body in the seat (if you are seated), and the object you carry (if you carry a grounding object with you). 8. Distractions will always come, and the intention of this practice is to return to your breath and ground you in the present moment whenever you feel carried away by the chaos of your mind, life, and body. Pay attention to the ground beneath you and your body where it stands or sits, and if you have an object to focus on, bring your attention to that object and how it feels—its weight and texture, in this moment.