FAITH OF ORIGIN 81 of the dysfunctional learned patterns can be changed, and knowledge begins that process. Where Church-Hurt and Religious Wounds Begin If we go back to the early years of life, we can see the template for everything that follows. Specifically as it relates to religious wounds, what we learn about life and love from family and faith will inform how we see ourselves and the rest of the world. The following are a few examples of how the God and father/ parent figurehead showed up in the lives of people who experienced childhood (and often continuing into adulthood) religious trauma. These are based on interviews in which these people were asked a specific question (see below) about their childhood experience of God and church. Each had articulated experiencing religious trauma and church-hurt and participated in a survey I sent out to collect data on this experience of family of origin and faith of origin wounding. LIFE PARABLES: Childhood Images of God DEB: As far as I can remember, God was to be feared, and he was constantly judging you. Jesus was my uncle who dressed up every Easter as Jesus and re-enacted the story of his crucifixion and resurrection. (He was one of the few light-skinned members of the church and had blue eyes. I wondered many times if that was the only reason they chose him.) I didn’t have much of a concept of Jesus as our Savior, or being a part of the Trinity. I just remembered he was the best character in the book. I don’t believe we were taught about Heaven as much as we were about going to Hell if you are a sinner. I remember watching movies with beheadings as a young child, and I pretty much concluded that was my future. I went to mostly Pentecostal and Baptist churches growing up, and we were taught that Catholics and Jehovah’s witnesses were Satan worshipers. Oh... and that God favored men over women. MELINDA: When I was a child, our family went to the local, somewhat large, Presbyterian Church. But my Grandmother was charismatic and took me to various charismatic meetings when I was old enough. When I was very young, I believed that without saying the sinner’s prayer, asking Jesus into my heart, I would go to hell. I was terrified of the darkness and loneliness of hell. I very much wanted to