40 SACREd WOundS because they engage the hormones and adrenaline responses in the body—when your brain brings you back to the traumatic place, your body and mind in the present respond as if there is danger. Our hormones speed up our body to try to get it prepared for that danger so coming out of an intrusive thought or nightmare can feel like you just jumped out of freezing water—it is a shock that puts your whole self on high alert. A grounding practice like the one in Chapter 2 is often the most effective way to bring a person back to the present and away from the trigger. Just creating present-centered associations as simple as, “I am sitting in this chair,” or “I can feel the floor beneath my feet,” can help ground you back into the present. Nightmares Nightmares are extensions of intrusive thoughts and flashbacks, which visit a person in their dreams. Because we have more control in our conscious minds, when we fall asleep we are much more sensitive and vulnerable to the traumatic memories, persons, or experiences. Depending on the extent, there may be a few acutely traumatic experiences (or a subconscious version of those experiences) that may show up regularly in the dream state. Sometimes, however, the nightmares are just plagued by feeling unsafe in their lives— family home, faith space, or elsewhere. So it is also possible that the nightmares will just manifest that feeling of being unsafe into dreams that have nothing to do with exact experiences someone has had, but create anxiety-based scenarios, which may seem related to no particular memory. Examples of Nightmares in Religious Trauma In religious trauma, like with intrusive thoughts and flashbacks, the nightmare can bring a person back to a specific incidence of abuse or negation in a person’s religious experience. It can even bring into the dream specific persons who were most harmful in the person’s negative experiences in religious contexts. It can also, as articulated above, manifest as feelings of lack of control, helplessness, or anxiety. These dreams might have nothing to do with specific instances but manifest in fear-based dream themes including: the feeling of falling, running from an unknown (or known) source and feeling weighted down or unable to move, being unprepared or underprepared at church or school or for a test or possibly religious ritual experience INSIDE THE ANIMAL 41 and also just generally being taunted or made fun of and feeling shame or a less-than-good-enough feeling. Simple Tools to Address Nightmares in Religious Trauma Often when you have a trauma-induced nightmare, the fear and even certain imprints from the dream state may leave residual effects right after waking up. That can include still seeing the figures or shapes from the dream like a shadow left over from that acute memory. A person will also often wake up sweating or with a racing pulse due to that feeling of danger, which is then translated into the dream, and back out again, based on fear in a real past-lived experience. Both grounding and breath practices are useful to center back in the present and out of the dream state. If it is a really alarming nightmare, it also can be useful to turn the lights on or get a drink of water before returning to bed. Listening to relaxing music or a relaxation CD prior to returning to sleep can also set a foundation for safety rather than fear. Hypervigilance and Exaggerated Startle Response Hypervigilance is really just a fancy term for exaggerated startle response. Both are terms to describe the high-alert status that the body and mind go into when they perceive danger. In normal life this would occur when there was a real crisis or feeling of danger. When the memories and feelings of traumatic experiences get lodged in our body and mind, we can be triggered to this level of hypervigilance and overalertedness when we are safe, but our body and mind believes we are in danger based on old information. Exaggerated startle response is the way the body responds to this state of high alert. Examples of Hypervigilance and Exaggerated Startle Response in Religious Trauma In religious trauma, as with any other traumatic experience, this kind of high alertedness can show up in our lives in the way we become oversensitive to safe things as if they were dangerous things. Being tapped on the shoulder and twitching or jumping would be an example of that, especially if the traumatic experience(s) involved some kind of bodily assault or harm. Another example would be jumping or twitching at a loud noise. Other sensitivities could be around all facets of the senses—sensitivity to touch or certain sounds, 42 SACREd WOundS sights, smells, or tastes that trigger traumatic memories or reminders of traumatic environments. Simple Tools to Address Hypervigilance and Exaggerated Startle Response Because this kind of response is an overstimulation of the senses and the body based on memories stored in the body and mind, some ways to diminish the intensity of those feelings is to sensitize in new ways not associated with traumatic experience. Some examples of tools include a cotton ball or small roller of perfume or natural oils contrary to the triggering memory. A common one I use is lavender because it is soothing to many people, but you could use a favorite scent of any kind. Another example is to carry a token or reminder of something positive or grounding with you—this could be some silly putty, a rock from the beach, or a silver dollar. Anything that is weighty enough to hold in your hand but discrete enough you can keep in your pocket will work—that way you can hold it when you need to ground without anyone even seeing it. Anxiety and Panic Attacks Anxiety is a natural response to a literal danger or threat but in traumatic stress it gets thrown into hyperdrive and can exceed what is necessary for self-protection in certain situations. In its most extreme form, it can induce panic attacks where the brain-body cannot regulate the level of distress being experienced and the system essentially overloads. It overloads to such an extent that often people who are having panic attacks sincerely believe they are having a heart attack—the symptomology can be almost identical. A person’s chest feels acute pain, their muscles contract, their throat can constrict, their palms sweat, and their pulse races. In some cases it can lead to hyperventilation—which is when the breath speeds up so quickly it can make you dizzy. Examples of Anxiety and Panic Attacks in Religious Trauma In religious trauma, anxiety is rooted in the original spaces and places that induced traumatic response—this could be due to physical or sexual dangers, but it also can be from a general feeling of invalidation by persons or a faith community group based on identity or differences from the system/community. Being a woman, INSIDE THE ANIMAL 43 gay, a person of color, or even disabled could be a reason someone was made to feel less than in a particular community, and that sense of invalidation can lead to anxiety not just in that group but in entering other spaces—there is a constant fear that this new place or space might offer the same painful invalidation. This makes it hard to build intimacy, try new things, or enter new spaces. When this fear becomes acute—due to injury in previous faith environment—just entering a new life experience or environment can lead to a pre-emptive feeling of fear that can become incapacitating. Simple Tools to Address Anxiety and Panic Attacks in Religious Trauma Just breathe. As simple as that sounds, regulating breath is the first and greatest antidote to panic. When we panic, our breath gets held or sped up to hyperventilation level. I teach every client, contemplative practice student, and grad social work student breath-regulating practices as a baseline for everything else we work on in their respective contexts. Breath is life—and regulating breath is the first step to regaining life. Breathe again. Breathe fully. Explore practices that help you breathe fully and completely. The three-part breath is a starter practice in this book, but expand from there. Just steer clear of any breathing techniques that have you hold or speed up your breath—in trauma healing there is no need for any more of that breathing in your life or your healing practices. Down the road, if you want to use those you can—but not in the healing process. Anger/Angry outbursts Anger is the external cousin of anxiety. While on the face of it, people whose traumatic response presents as anxiety and anger may seem on other planes, but they are really just two primary ways that our brain-body system tries to ward off danger—as we discussed in the traumatic response concepts. Also, anger can present outwardly or inwardly—anger presented outwardly is seen as rage and even violence; anger directly inwardly is emotional or even physical masochism and self-hate (the cousin of guilt). They are equally destructive. Examples of Anger/Anger Outbursts in Religious Trauma In religious trauma anger can be a healthy response, or it can bend toward an emotionally destructive compulsion. It can be 44 SACREd WOundS empowerment and empowering; it can be justice and justice-seeking, but it can just as easily be destroying you inside as you are telling yourself it is empowering and justice seeking. True empowerment that lasts and justice seeking that has stamina needs to burn away the rage to get to the good stuff—you need to eventually let go of hate to do the best for yourself and others in this world. Anger can destroy us. In the healing process from religious injury, like in the grieving process, there is a season for anger and there are moments when it is necessary and righteous. Eventually you will have to give up the habit of rage “against the machine” (aka religion) to transform yourself into more than just opposition to what you loathe. Our best selves are the promotion of what we love. This is no easy task—to burn out the hate—but it is an essential part of healing. Just like religion is not, in and of itself, the answer to all healing, rage against religion is not the final answer to healing. When anger is consuming your thoughts, actions, and much of your time for the person, persons, or religious system that hurt you—that is when it is no longer functional and borderline compulsive. We are addictive creatures—and hate is especially addictive. Rage gives us adrenaline and cortisol—that is why we have the term “adrenaline junkie.” I have seen it hundreds of times—where the rage post-trauma consumes everything good in a person, client, or friend, until nothing is left of life but that anger. This is toxic in religion as in all other injuries. It is hard to understand, but it is essential for healing. Be more than your anger—use it to help you heal and motivate you, but then let it go. It is the only way to be fully whole again. Religion and church can not be everything for anyone—either in the trenches of it, or in opposition to it. We must move beyond the absolutes to become healed and whole again. Simple Tools to Address Anger/Anger Outbursts in Religious Trauma Since anger is anxiety’s cousin, the same basic rule applies— breathe again. Breathe slowly and deeply. This will give you enough time to think about your thoughts, words, and actions before you act from anger. You cannot take back what you have already done—but taking a few breaths before choosing to act is the first step to learning how to change your course and make calm decisions. Especially with the speed of our culture and action and response times between texting, tweeting, Instagramming, and beyond—sometimes stopping to take a breath is a good thing for all of us. INSIDE THE ANIMAL 45 Complicated Grief and Loss Grief and loss will enter into every life, but when we are hurt or hurt others, the grief can feel like a tsunami of pain—too much to bear. Like complex trauma, complex grief is not just one incident, but a web of pain and loss. In religious injury, this pain is very complex. Depending on whether a person is in the community that hurt them or has left that community, the loss can include the loss of family, community, and faith tradition. Even when the place and people who raised us hurt us, to lose all those things when a person walks away is extremely painful. That is a deep layer of grief. Then if the trauma includes some version of negation of the self—based on gender, race, sexuality, or even personality—it can create a huge amount of grief, which can border on shame. Even when we want to believe the truth about ourselves—that our life is valuable, and we are good and enough as we are—years of being told the opposite takes its toll. A loss of the person we might have been, without that level of hurt, negation, or abuse, is a great loss and needs to be validated as true grief. There is a large amount of grief and loss in religious trauma. Validate yourself and all you have lost. Give yourself time to feel those wounds and then, when ready, prepare to address the grief so it doesn’t take you down. Examples of Complicated Grief and Loss in Religious Trauma The details about how grief and loss can manifest in a complex way after religious trauma begin in the definition, however, it cannot be understated how much grief there can be for being told you are less than valuable as you are. If you are a woman, gay, or a person of color in a faith tradition that marginalizes those aspects of yourself, you probably have felt that pain. It is doubly painful and disappointing when it is family inside the faith community who mirrors that invalidation and when you are told the source of your “not enough” nature comes from the ultimate “parent” such as a God figure. It can take time to feel valid as a person again, but the loss of that time of life you felt less-than could remain. Beyond being traumatic this experience of invalidation, suffering, and pain can manifest into complicated grief—grief that goes deeper and lasts longer than normative grief, which we work through and are able to move onward from. Complicated grief like trauma that turns to PTSD requires its own healing—we have to mourn what was when exiting unhealthy 46 SACREd WOundS belief systems. This loss is often loss of family, friends and a God image and each one has to be grieved in its own way and its own time. Simple Tools to Address Complicated Grief and Loss in Religious Trauma I find ritual and ceremony to be deeply powerful ways to address grief and loss. Because the pain can be so deeply felt and complex, it can be beneficial to seek a therapist or support professional to help you move through this process and the ceremonies for release, which can help you move beyond the pain. That said, there are a number of practices offered in this text that can help begin this process. Letter writing to a former version of yourself whom you feel is lost is one ritual. Burning your pain in a fire ceremony or using a letting-go ritual with water is another way. Anything that engages us with natural elements or cultural traditions can offer great tools to release grief. Trust and Intimacy Issues It is no wonder that after experiencing abuse or being diminished or bullied within an unhealthy faith structure or community, it is hard to trust and build intimacy. This is both communal and interpersonal. Since a community is made up of individual people, and the people who hurt you in faith community are also often friends and family, it is very hard to rebuild a foundation of trust. Then if the traumatic experience(s) or belief systems created negative feelings or shame/ guilt related to who you are as a person in relationship to others, and so often as a sexual being, entering into relationships after that experience can make one feel very conflicted. Even when we know what we learned about ourselves is not true, it is hard to uproot the triggers to shame and guilt for loving someone, being intimate, or having a positive relationship to your own body. Additionally, to build trust if the foundational relationships of your early life (family, faith, friends, God) were all abusive or negative, a person has to learn trust from the basement up. This is no small feat. Examples of Trust and Intimacy Issues in Religious Trauma Trust and intimacy, as well as the underlying understanding of love and being loved, are rooted in how we are taught those elements by family and our community systems in childhood. Since many people’s religious trauma begins inside of those early systems—the INSIDE THE ANIMAL 47 family and the family in context to the religious community—the ability to have a healthy model of love is very difficult. In unhealthy religion, love, God’s love, the community’s love, and even the family’s love is contingent on playing by a set of rules—it doesn’t mirror an omniscient love that can be found in healthy religious systems, but rather presents that all love is conditional. This makes love and trust a very fragile element—conditional on doing all the right things the right way; otherwise love can be taken away and acceptance rescinded. This fragility sets up a very delicate and breakable capacity for trust and an incapacity for deep intimacy—which is born out of being who we are authentically and being loved for our authentic self. Simple Tools to Address Trust and Intimacy Issues in Religious Trauma Learning love and self-acceptance, and the requisite trust and intimacy that build out of that, must often be learned from the ground up after religious trauma. Begin with practices that make you feel good about yourself or hobbies that help you connect with who you are and what you love. Once you have a foundation of self-esteem, self-acceptance, and practice accessing your true self (not the self that anyone else wants you to be), you can begin to find external love, trust, and intimacy with less fear. It is a slow process, so begin small. Find one thing you love and dive into that, with all you are and all that you can be. Then you can manifest your own safe space from which to build up love. Isolation and Avoidance When you feel you aren’t, can’t be, or aren’t allowed to be your true self in your community or family system, removing yourself as much as possible from others can seem like a temporary solution to a more permanent issue. When a person leaves their religiously wounding community, that response of withdrawal from the world can be hard to break. Also, if you are struggling with knowing who you are and are fearful, based on past experience of sharing that with others, removing yourself from the world may be lonely, but it can also feel safe. If your self-esteem has been broken down, it can be hard to imagine that other people want you in their life and world. Isolation is a common coping mechanism post-trauma to avoid triggers and more hurtful experiences, and as a method of keeping away from 48 SACREd WOundS old people, places, and things from the past. This response over time, however, can feed depression, low self-worth, and create even more complex issues of guilt, shame and trust. Examples of Isolation and Avoidance in Religious Trauma Sometimes this can be selective isolation post-religious injury and woundedness—the most likely example would be avoiding any faith community and any program or even conversation that includes religious words. When it begins to invade all manner of life is when it can become emotionally dangerous—we need people and companionship. It becomes more problematic if you don’t have even one person or place where you feel safe. This is why starting small to build back trust is valuable—it removes some of the barriers and wards off isolation that can grow to near agoraphobia in some cases. I have worked with many clients who began with fear and anxiety, and then moved to selective isolation, and then to a place where all interaction felt unsafe. Like anything else, being around others is something we practice each day by investing in something or someone. With the Internet, we have the advantage of interacting with others at a distance. That said, real life interaction is as important, arguably more important, in this age of one-click relationships. Simple Tools to Address Isolation and Avoidance in Religious Trauma It can be understandable after being hurt by your religious community that withdrawing from life and the world seems like a viable and reasonable response. In some ways it really is, but it can also create a habit of avoidance that can become as hard to break as any other symptom or traumatic response. Sometimes people will return to some kind of community group or tradition—we are social creatures, and without some human interaction life is difficult; also without some community of meaning or shared values it can also be difficult. Often something people miss the most when they leave their tradition was the community element, as well as shared experience and views. Even if in the end that wasn’t true, there is a conflict about the lack of loneliness in a religious context. Engaging in some new friendships and eventually even community groups can heal this dimension of trauma. It can be as slow as it needs to be—but we are social creatures. Many people over time return to some faith, religious context, or philosophical/shared values community. Whether it is a INSIDE THE ANIMAL 49 meditation gathering, a yoga satsang (community meal), political party network, professional network, or even some different facet or sect of one’s faith of origin, being connected in life is a healthy component of a life fully lived. Testing yourself with one relationship or picking one community group to engage with—even the most benign like softball or knitting—is a good way to learn to be in community in some way again without the unhealthy components. Guilt and Shame Nearly every Catholic joke ever been written begins with some line about guilt and religion. As a side note, although I was plenty hurt by people and elements of my Catholic upbringing, I actually didn’t have an overwhelming amount of shame. I view these as just an irony to articulate that every person’s story is different, but often religious hurt can include some nature of guilt and shame. Also, if someone in a religious context abuses, one often sees the rules or doctrine of the tradition used by abusers to validate their abuse and maintain silence and secrecy around their crimes. Guilt and shame can become imbedded in a person like a tattoo of pain, which is difficult and painful to remove. Issues of gender, sexual orientation, and sexuality are dimensions highly laden with guilt in many unhealthy traditions and doctrines. This can often take time to work through and shake off, layer by layer. Examples of Guilt and Shame in Religious Trauma Guilt and shame in religious trauma can be built in early in life— which impacts the ability to feel good enough or valuable before a person can even understand guilt or shame. Being who you are—a woman, a gay person, a person of color—and being negated by your community can be very painful—especially when it is woven into how you understand yourself in context to your family, your belief system, and God. Shame is difficult to shake off when a person is told that the origin of shame and the one that validates the need to be ashamed is God. How do you even begin to untangle that belief structure? It is not easy. Simple Tools to Address Guilt and Shame in Religious Trauma Building self-worth is a huge component of addressing guilt and shame, as well as being involved in conversations and communities 50 SACREd WOundS who validate you for who and how you are in your most authentic self. For some people, this could include getting involved in justice or advocacy volunteer work in the area of their own negation. The important thing is to keep in a mind frame of empowerment rather than rage in these contexts. Advocating for and having a voice in issues about a part of yourself that was once seen as “wrong” by your faith community can be empowering, but it also can feed rage. You just have to be careful. Find ways to empower your true self—and spend your time around those who validate who you are. Slowly the pain and shame imposed by the outside source—a system and/or family/community—will begin to melt away as you realize you have value and worth. Emotional Numbing and Dissociation When we have been battered and bruised, sometimes the only or most accessible recourse is to shut down. In the mildest form of this, it can be as simple as tuning out what is being said or where you are in any particular moment—this is something all of us have done. In response to a greater sense of danger, manifesting the freeze trauma response becomes more acute and numbness can become more pervasive. The primary coping mechanism for those who have experienced trauma and couldn’t physically leave their circumstances may have been to numb out. This can mean shutting down feelings, but it can also involve completely removing oneself from the situation. When mind and spirit exit an experience entirely, it is called dissociation. Dissociation can be the floating above yourself and seeing what is happening experience, often experienced by those who have survived sexual trauma or extensive physical abuse. It also can manifest as losing time due to being completely absent or blacking out during an experience (not due to substances but just the brain exiting the situation as a stress response). If dissociation is more severe, mental health treatment should be sought immediately because this process can be a danger to daily life and functioning. Examples of Emotional Numbing and Dissociation in Religious Trauma Depending on the type of trauma experienced in a religious context, the nature and intensity of the emotional numbing and dissociation will vary from person to person. Acute physical and INSIDE THE ANIMAL 51 sexual abuse can lead to more dissociative states to self-protect— primarily because being able to leave might not have been an option in the initial trauma, and so the brain created this escape hatch to protect you from having to be present for the experience. If the pain and suffering wasn’t as physically as emotionally dangerous (which all trauma is), then being able to numb to feeling states—fear, anxiety, anger, etc.—is often how someone deals with being or staying in a religiously hurtful community. As we know, we can’t selectively numb or dissociate, so often this way of coping will carry over to postfaith-hurt experiences and be harder to manage once the brain is in the habit of exiting discomfort. Simple Tools to Address Emotional Numbing and Dissociation in Religious Trauma Grounding, mindfulness, and guided relaxation practices can help teach the brain and body to stay present and focused in peaceful moments so it can access those resources also in distress. For more severe dissociation, therapy with a trained trauma therapist is necessary to learn ways to contain stress and find safe space in the mind, body, and physical world. Once the brain-body system can integrate a sense of safety, it will begin staying present rather than exiting when stressed. LIFE PARABLES: Triggers The below “life parables” are extracts of stories of persons interviewed about their experience of religious injury and spiritual trauma. Some are the real names, and others have been changed to protect those who don’t yet feel safe to speak out. The following Life Parables describe these people’s experience of triggers, those negative and sometimes visceral reminders of their traumatic religious experiences, and how they impact them when these experience them today. The content of these stories are intact, although some language has been slightly altered for readability and flow. DAVE: Some organized religions and their environments, like churches, still trigger me when I see or go inside them. Even traditions with which I don’t have a history, like the Episcopal Church, can trigger me with the ritual of kneeling or taking communion or singling a hymn I sung as a kid. It can bring me back to the absolute ideologies I learned from each of my family members, in different and dysfunctional ways, that one way of belief is right and all others are 52 SACREd WOundS wrong. This was so conflicting when, after my parents’ divorce, each part of my family played tug of war for me, my time, and my beliefs. When I was with my dad, I had to be Catholic. When I was with my mom, I had to be Methodist, and when I was with my grandmother, I had to be Southern Baptist. It was so confusing to me, and I ended up feeling like if everyone thought their way was right, then there was probably no right way at all. So even today the sight or rituals of institutional religions remind me of that painful tug of war of family and faith. BILL: I think a lot of the canned answers that church tries to offer still trigger me, especially blaming people who don’t want to come to church as if they are less devout or too lazy or whatever. The idea that people care less because they aren’t sitting in church pews on Sundays (where I would see very faithless people sitting week after week) are somehow less good or valuable to God is a huge angering thing—one of my greatest religious triggers. Also related to that trigger for me, as someone who sits inside a faith community, is when leadership or membership of church spend time asserting there is something wrong with people who don’t want to come to church. This always seems more like avoidance of looking inward to see how they are contributing to that, how they have been uninviting, or how they are or aren’t living out faith in their own lives. Additionally, as a person of color, to hear white men in church talking about their issues and difficulties with political correctness (expressing how they are inconvenienced by it) is very hurtful and triggering for me as someone who has been hurt by people of faith before, and as a person who has been marginalized in church communities because of my racial background. My sisters and brothers of color don’t want to be insulted publically, and with mostly white denominations and diocese, I have experienced the lack of understanding and empathy for people of color—in talking about and even toward them when they show up in the pews. For me, that is a very hard pill to swallow. MARG: I am very triggered any time I am in a group of anti-gay Christians (whether five or 5000); it impacts me to such a great extent it causes me to experience panic symptoms. Nobody even has to say anything. This panic trigger also occurs when I am around those who use the anti-gay smoke screen that states “Love the sinner, hate the sin.” I feel right through their words into an inherent feeling of INSIDE THE ANIMAL 53 danger. I also have to be very careful to limit my exposure to anti-gay Christians’ remarks overheard in person or on TV, or to anti-gay writing. Even moderate exposure causes me to get emotionally overloaded and unable to control my feelings of anxiety, panic, and fear. KISHA: When I enter Pentecostal churches I am triggered. I hate seeing the elevated pulpit that congregants have to sit below and look “up” at. I believe the subliminal psychology in doing that causes congregants to subconsciously worship and/or deify the people who sit in those elevated seats. I can even be triggered when I see these churches’ services and content about their worship on Facebook. I am also triggered and angered when I encounter church people and they ask me where I attend church as though they assume I have to go to church somewhere. In order to protect myself from such triggers, I usually try to avoid those situations altogether. However, during those times when they are unavoidable, I generally talk them over with my therapist and/or with friends. FAY: Writing this, joining PTCS (Posttraumatic Church Syndrome) group on Facebook, and counseling (as a therapy provider) others with similar stories are all triggers. I find that I can use this, at least in my profession, because being aware of my own weaknesses and pain is so important when being a therapist. DEB: Certain phrases will trigger me, such as “I was depressed and I gave it to God and now I am healed.” I’m sorry, you may have gone through a period of depression, but when you are diagnosed with depression, generalized anxiety disorder, and have been through the process of ruling out PTSD (I still self-medicate too much to get that diagnosis I guess), it’s not as easy as just giving it up to God. We need medical intervention just like anyone who has a visible ailment, and I feel when people use those kinds of phrases they minimize pain, suffering, and the healing process. Another phrase that really triggers me is, “God wants us to have riches, those who are still poor are stuck in the mentality of poverty, and you must not have enough faith to still be in that position”. This makes me think, “Spare me”. My grandparents were piss poor and had the most faith of anyone I knew. Normally when I get triggered in these ways. I react with anger (by venting to the trusted people), because I can’t believe this kind of stuff comes out of their mouths. I also try to keep in mind that they may mean well but are terribly misinformed. 54 SACREd WOundS ANGIE: When people fill their vocabulary with God, blessed, Jesus, etc., it really triggers me. Going to church is a trigger for my nightmares. And the phrase “God told me to [fill in the blank],” makes me want to choke the people saying it.. DEANNA: Purity culture is a big trigger for me. The moment someone suggests that young women need to show less skin so their husbands can stay righteous makes me go into a rage that blares through my temples and makes me want to get drunk and take my clothes off in front of anyone who will look. The pervasive and persistent attitude that my body is not my own, and that just my moving through life is somehow dirty and tempting to someone else, reopens many wounds. When someone says the spiritual but not religious are just wishy-washy people who can’t commit and are afraid of admitting they are sinners demonstrates to me that they are tone-deaf and blind to the spiritual temperature of this world. It hurts. I am also triggered when someone says something completely ignorant toward members of other religions. For me, it demonstrates they don’t care (even though the church claims to love everyone) and they don’t believe that God cares, which is so untrue. MELINDA: Words that trigger me are: forgiveness, reconciliation, femininity, Evangelical. It still upsets me when people say things like: “We are persecuted as Christians here in America. We are at war!” The debate about homosexuals and whether they can worship in the church also triggers me. I am also triggered by the idea that the only way to be a Christian is to be part of a church. EMMA: My sister and I learned we were safe with the Native Church as Native American women and the people there brought safety and comfort, but if you were not within the Native Church (church on a reservation with Native American people), you were not safe and not accepted. For years I was triggered walking into a non-Native church, because after leaving the Reservation the White churches were the places where we were most alienated, ostracized, and meant to feel both other and less than anyone else. It was a very lonely feeling—to go from feeling God and comfort in church on the Reservation to feeling so unsafe and unloved by how we were treated in White Church. For years after being emotionally hurt and threatened by members of the White church (and also our community when we lived off the Reservation), I was unable to walk into any church at all—it was just too painful, scary, and triggering INSIDE THE ANIMAL 55 of my religious wounds at the hands of those in our first non-Native (White) Church. REFLECTIoN oN LIFE PARABLES: While the trigger examples offered by Dave, Bill, Marg, kisha, Fay, Deb, Angie, Deanna, Melinda, and Emma are spread across a wide spectrum, they all define the ways they felt negated, less than, betrayed, alienated, and ostracized by their faith communities. Beyond that, they also describe how the code of their hurts was written across their lives in the form of triggers (things about the faith tradition or any faith that bring back the memory and hurt of their experiences)— which they have to encounter and address, always taking them back to the origin place of their hurt. We should all pay attention to this roadmap of hurt—it helps us learn about ourselves, others, and the power of institutional and communal hurt on someone, long after the original pain experience has long since passed. Triggers can have a longstanding ripple effect in the life of a person. Both as the persons who might be triggered in religious contexts and those in religious contexts trying to understand the wounded, it is important to understand that it takes time to see, address, and diminish the impact of hurtful triggers in life. If you are experiencing religious triggers, then understand that it is reasonable to feel triggered in religious contexts if your wounds come from religious sources. With time and work, you can begin to release the hold they have on you. For those who are trying to understand persons triggered by religious ideologies, languages, places, and spaces, you have to understand the weight of this hurt. You can’t diminish or shame them into changing—if you try to do that you will just repeat the abusive behavior that caused the triggering in the first place. Love, patience, and complete acceptance, with time, can begin to help those suffering these triggers release the pain for themselves and in relationship to others. The Redemption of Symptoms: Putting the Brain-Body to Work The value of the brain, body, and trauma symptoms is that the change of them into distress proves one truism—the brain and the body can change. So if this is true, then there is a reciprocal truth—it can change again. The most absurd hope and reality of posttraumatic stress and its infiltration so completely into the body, mind, and 56 SACREd WOundS spirit is that the infection of pain can be reversed. In traumatic stress, and the reverberations of response in the fibers of our being, we are taught that whatever the nature of the brain, body, and spirit, it can be changed. Powerfully, painfully, excruciatingly, the system of our selves can change. What this proves—with the most rudimentary understanding of science as I know it—is that Newton’s law applies everywhere. Every action, in the universe, has an equal and opposite reaction. For every suffering that is imposed on us, and the symptoms that take up root in our veins, there is the potential (maybe even a mandate) for an equal and opposite reaction. The force that binds us in suffering also offers us a bastion of hope—that we can and are capable of an equal and opposite response to that traumatic force. We can change. Brain science and the study of the brain proves this is true with each new study of the brain. It is not easy or mandatory. It is only possible. We can reach into that possibility at any time. If the safety of symptomology, or the triggers of trauma and response, are not something you are ready to let go of, that is ok. Those trigger responses have served you well. They protect you from the pain, but they also keep you cornered off from joy. You can change, but you can do it only when you are ready. I don’t want to push you into that space. If you have experienced religious injury and spiritual abuse, you have been pushed enough for a lifetime. You can heal. I offer you that hope. I also offer you the option to say, “Not today.” When you are ready, the tools are here. Community is here to welcome and embrace you into the space of the possible—even when it seems impossible. You decide if or when you want to enter through the garden gate of hope—that choice is yours. A HEALING PRACTICE: Creating a Safe Space/Guided Visualization When we experience trauma, especially in the places meant to be safe—faith and/or family—it can make it hard to feel safe anywhere else. The safe space visualization allows you to create an internal safe space, one of your own making, which you can carry with you everywhere and all the time. This safe space becomes what we call in therapy a “transitional object”—think Linus’s blanket from Charlie Brown. A transitional object is something we can carry with us that brings a feeling of safety into our lives—the hope is that over time,