82 SACREd WOundS please God and be found worthy. I was sure, as a small child, that I was a sinner in need of God’s love. But, frankly, this was highly influenced by my physically punishing Dad and emotionally absent Mom. As a child, when I pictured Jesus, He was in the clouds, or surrounded by children. But looking back, the concept of him being an adult man whom I was supposed to love seems a little creepy. KATE: I grew up in an Irish Catholic family. My mother is all Irish – the youngest daughter in a family with 22 children, all having the same father. Her mother married her father at age 19, after his first wife died and left him with six kids. My grandmother went on to have 16 children of her own. My mom had eight kids, and I was the fourth born and the first daughter. I say all this to give you some orientation about the circumstances of my early life, but we weren’t a stereotypical big, happy family. We were poor, and my parents were overwhelmed and unable to properly care for us. My mother worked full time (in the 50s, this made her unusual) because she had no choice, and she was an alcoholic for about half the time I was growing up. We went to Mass every Sunday, made our first communions at age six, went to confession every other Saturday, got confirmed at age 12, and went to Catholic schools whenever they let us in for free. Despite all of this, I don’t have a single memory of taking the idea of God seriously. It might have to do with being brought to a church where the officiants faced away from the congregation and spoke in Latin, or with the complete absence of girls and women at the altar, or with the rote nature of the Mass itself. It might just be that I saw no evidence in the faces of the people around me that what was taking place was supposed to have meaning. Everyone seemed tired, bored, and waiting for it to be over, and that’s what I was doing, too—for 18 years. HoPE: Childhood faith in God was pretty passionate and intense. I loved and wanted to please Him, but I also had a strange relationship with Him due to my home being deeply religious and grounded in faith, yet abusive in many ways. As I grew older, my views about God became complex and confused, and yet I always still desired and sought a relationship with Him. I longed passionately for His comfort, and once as a preteen, having cried out to Him one night, “God, I wish I could just feel you hug me!!!” I experienced very distinctly what felt to be a hug. That helped me to hang on. As I FAITH OF ORIGIN 83 matured, I could look back and see that I developed kind of a push-pull relationship with God—desiring Him and His involvement in my life, yet feeling walls and barriers due to the impact of the abuse. I don’t remember clear images in my mind about God, Jesus, or Heaven beyond the pictures in storybooks. DAVID: God looked exactly like my father. I still see an old man sitting on a throne in the clouds. I just don’t fight it any more. I associated God with father. My dad was a strong disciplinarian, and I saw God as strict. Jesus was more like a buddy, so that is how I maintained my spiritual life—through Jesus—but being obedient to God at the same time. It was as if I was afraid of “father” and didn’t want to make him mad, so I was very obedient but inwardly screaming. REFLECTIoN oN LIFE PARABLES From these five stories, a few themes emerge in terms of the God-parent/father who shows up in many of the early religious experiences of those persons wounded by faith. First, God is a man, an angry man/ He is an angry, misogynistic man who appears (specifically in Melinda’s account) somewhat like a real-life abusive father figure. Second, this God talks an awful lot about sin and hell. He is selling fire and brimstone, and this is understandably terrifying to a child. It’s a bit like a belief system built on Grimm’s fairy tales, but much more frightening. To be fully transparent, this isn’t the account of every interviewee. There is not an angry God in other’s people’s childhoods, which you will read about later in this book. If we remember that what we learn in childhood is expressed throughout our lives, it is understandable that for people like Deb, kate, Hope, Melinda, and David, it is going to be harder to avoid being abused by people/entities who look like their original parent and God figure. The primary task of this chapter is to set the foundation for where religious trauma can, and often does, begin. It is also to offer insight in where the angry God complex begins in family and religious upbringing and review how damaging that can be in early childhood. This chapter is about looking at faith and God through the lens of your own childhood to see what your faith of origin looked like. Maybe it was healthy and nurturing, maybe it was aggressive and abusive, and possibly it falls between the two places. The important thing is to see what your origin story looks like and to understand 84 SACREd WOundS those who have been abused by religious communities and leadership through the lens of their origins. Although it can be even more difficult, we sometimes need to look at the religious abusers through the lens of their family of origin and faith of origin belief structures. At the heart of most evil done, outside of truly inborn sociopathy, is someone who was told they weren’t good enough by people or some image of God. Not that we don’t ask for justice for evil done, but it can help us to understand that even those who do evil have often also been wounded at some point, or been taught to hurt or hate as part of their own faith and/ or family of origin. It is rare that I have found an abuser in a religious context (again, outside of a sociopath—someone who is incapable of any human emotion) who wasn’t in some way invalidated or abused by their parentage—whether earthly or their image of God-parent. This is not permission or even absolution for the kinds of heinous crimes perpetrated by those who abuse—as a survivor of trauma I know how hard that forgiveness is to give—but it may help just to understand the “becoming” process of abuse and abusers as well as those who have been abused. If you take nothing else from this chapter, take a moment to look at your own life and those in your midst by the measurement of from whence they (and you) came—starting with the self and working outward. We can learn a lot about our present by looking at our origin. It doesn’t need to take forever, just long enough to see the trajectory of our life based on our beginning. Then we move forward. Then we can learn how to change what we want to have the life we are capable of, not just the one we have been given. The Cosmic and Human Parentage: Double the Parentage and the Hurt I hate it when people say, “There are no atheists in foxholes.” I dislike it because it feels like a capricious and oversimplified appropriation of the wartime experience for the purposes of a catchy evangelism slogan—like the kind you would find on an overly gaudy billboard along a major highway. Also, as therapist for the Department of Veteran Affairs and working with hundreds of veterans for nearly a decade, I think it is a horribly misguided slogan. My reply (sometimes just to myself in the pithiness of my own brain) when someone asserts