WISDOM TEACHERS VERSUS FALSE GURUS 97 6. The Pyramid Scheme and Isolation: They want you to invite your friends to join this community—bring them in—but you can’t spend much time outside the community to see them. Your life must revolve around this community, teachings, members, and most importantly, its leader. You are taught that if you really loved your friends you would bring them in—if they don’t follow, then they aren’t the right friends for you anyway. 7. This Way Is the only Way: Building on the isolation tactics— this way, this teacher, their teaching—is the way to get all that you want. Every other way to spiritual wholeness or faith is just not as good or potentially totally wrong. There is no ambiguity— we are right and we are best, so why go anywhere else? 8. No Room for open-Ended Questions or Interpretations: If your question is to the leader to ask him or her what you should do, think, or believe, then that is ok. If you question or disagree with what is said, then you will be made to feel less than or like you don’t “get it.” There is no room for ambiguity with false gurus—because that means you might begin to question, and that wouldn’t work for their agenda. 9. Narcissism or Sociopathic Tendencies: Psychologically this kind of a personality has at least some traits of clinical narcissism—their confidence exudes from that place of buying their own greatness. In more extreme scenarios, they may also have some or all traits of sociopathy. Simply put, sociopathy is an incapacity for human emotion, which means they don’t feel the hurts they impose on others. This makes the manipulation they use easy for them to do as they have no capacity for remorse. Not all false guru leaders are sociopaths, but most will fall somewhere on the spectrum between narcissism and sociopathy. 10. They Are Above the World and Its Rules: Part of the reason that many of these type of leaders are the ones who end up in the headlines is because their ego is so big and their understanding of reality outside of themselves (especially as their power grows) is so distorted that they begin to believe what they are selling to the point that they think they are above reproach. Because they often have at least some traits of narcissism and the most extreme would probably fit on the spectrum for sociopathy, they will push the limits, and most end up doing something