94 SACREd WOundS guru traits.. I have a clinical eye when I encounter people like him— because of my study of trauma as well as my understanding of what yoga [or insert religion here] can be when it is healthy and what it can be when it is dysfunctional in its use and application. I walk into the class of this teacher, and his persona immediately takes up the room. He is confident with a certain pompousness that immediately makes me feel ill at ease. During the class, I noticed him lock eyes with a bunch of the younger woman, and at one point even with me. knowing the room, like many yoga rooms in my geographical area, was filled with a number of young, vulnerable women in early recovery seeking spirituality on their mat, I was immediately suspicious of his actions. There was something inherently “car salesmany” about him. To be clinical about it—he gave me the “icks”. Always trust your “icks”—they are your inner instinct trying to protect you from possible harm. Once you have been traumatized, there is that hair-raising feeling that goes deeper than trauma or traumatic response that is still calling out from deep inside to be heard. After the class ended I went up to this teacher to ask a question—I had a Groupon I was using for the class, and I wanted to stay and see what his version of Yoga Nidra (yoga guided meditation practice) might look like—at this point more out of research and morbid curiosity as I was already suspicious of his false guru-style nature. I had to wait a few minutes because, predictably but concerningly, there were a number of young women—some of whom I knew to be in recovery—waiting to speak to him in the same eager fashion you would find for a rock star. Unfortunately, with the rise of yoga as a dominantly understood domain for Western-raised people seeking Eastern-style spirituality, there can be a misunderstanding that because someone teaches yoga, he or she must have insight into some deeper and more transformative wisdom. This is no more true of every teacher or studio owner than it might be of every therapist or clergy member. As in all other arenas, there are healthy leaders and wisdom teachers, and there are dysfunctional/abusive leaders and false gurus. As he talked to these young women, he got uncomfortably close to them, his language full of platitudes and complements, and his eye contact ravenous as he gazed into their eyes, almost without blinking.