140 SACREd WOundS toward healing. With social media, there are people who can see they are not alone and are learning about intergenerational trauma in social media forum. The people in social services and support programs are starting to come now on the reservations, and they weren’t before. Right now my coworker and I from the White Bison Mending Broken Hearts program (healing program for intergenerational trauma) are working with Bishop John in the Episcopal Diocese of South Dakota to bring two more of our healing programs to South Dakota and the Lakota people who live there. Bishop John truly cares about helping people, and for me that is so heartwarming because I didn’t feel that way growing up from my church community. He understands about the intergenerational trauma and how important it is to do this work. For me, to see that in South Dakota is unbelievable, to see there is this bishop who cares. My hope is I can help people to discard their old beliefs, hurts, and traumas instead of setting up blocks. When I moved toward healing, I had to let go of a lot of my old negative beliefs. My hope moving forward is that there can be many more programs like the ones we are working on now. I hope the church could work with the community to help it heal. KISHA: At this time, I am not solid in my theology at all. I try to remain open. I believe there is a God simply because I believe it was Him who transcended and transformed my darkness on the day that would have been the last day of my life. No one else was present. No one else helped me. No one else could even reach me. It was just me, my darkness, and my plans to end it all until I experienced this luminous disruption. However, in spite of my belief in God and in Christ, I am very leery of Christian/Church culture. In my heart of hearts, I am not at all interested in church, though I am interested in community. However, I am very concerned about the hearts and souls who sit on church pews Sunday after Sunday, week after week, and get hurt, abused, mislead, and misinformed. If we are going to have church, I would rather take the lead so I can know people are being cared for well, however, I keep running into the same problem I had as a child: I don’t fit into the church system, and I continue to be rejected. For some reason, I am a threat to the current equilibrium established within most church systems, therefore, the easiest thing to do is dismiss me, silence me, and push me out.