THE WOUNDS THAT BIND 15 He began speaking of worthiness and eternity. He spoke of salvation and being saved. He spoke about who would enter heaven at the end of their lives and the end of time and who wouldn’t. Short version: Everyone in the room was in, and probably their parents, but everyone else was by no means a lock. Definitely anyone who didn’t believe in the Patriarch’s exact version of how it would all go could forget about even trying at the door. I had never heard anyone talk so absolutely and with such certainty about something that had always seemed to me a determination far above my cosmic pay grade. I didn’t get it. I was baffled, and as the crowd surged with applause and I was rocked by the shaking ground full of the urgency of hundreds of pounding feet, I started becoming more than a little freaked out. Where was I? What was this all about? Why did I feel further from God than I ever had been before in my life? Why did I suddenly feel so far from home? Inside of that welling fear was something like adolescent frustration and maybe a tinge of indignation. I was offended on behalf of the God I had grown to know in my life. I had also been coded with a learned justice-seeking, born from a mother who weighed strongly in my mind and who had always reminded me throughout childhood to speak out when no one else would for those unsaid injustices and truths. That, and I was innately and inherently stubborn. It led me to question the unquestionable in all situations. What about the Gandhis? I was marinating in my thoughts, deeply imbedded in my curiosity-laced frustration. as my two cabin counselors and cabin-mates walked back to our screened-in bunks following the rally. Because I was too young and naive to know any argument with this premise in this context was unwinnable before it even started, I heard the question leaving my lips: “But what about Gandhi?” Everyone, simultaneously, looked over at me as if they had all gone partially deaf. For a second that seemed like ages there was a pause, until counselor #1 responded, “What did you say?” “What about Gandhi? I mean, if what you are saying is true, what happens to all the good people who aren’t Christian?” The second counselor stared me down, “Didn’t you listen tonight? They go to hell.”