THE LOTUS AND THE MUD 139 them that I wasn’t able to refer to myself as a Christian. I think they know my heart better than I did. For a very long time, saying I was a Christian felt like taking on the label of my perpetrator. I don’t know what changed this year. I don’t know why I started to be able to say it, but I think maybe it was that I stopped being afraid that some of my LGBT friends would hate me. Christian is still a dirty word to some LGBT people because their wounds have never healed. I never let go of Jesus, but as long as I was afraid of those claiming to be His people,there was a separation. I don’t have a church anymore, and I don’t think I ever will again. I’m still too triggered by being around groups of people and by the way church people often act. I’m hypervigilant and always looking for the judgment and exclusion to show itself. I can’t imagine a time when I will feel safe in a church. But I have found my people, my tribe, and my faith community in the women and men of EEWC-Christian Feminism Today. They are my friends and mentors. They are my mothers, sisters, and brothers. And I am beginning to realize my heart is safe with them. EMMA: I see a lot of healing on the brink right now, even the work I see my sister doing to push more intergenerational trauma and healing issues forward and get people trained to understand intergenerational/historical trauma. As they learn more about themselves and that they are healing themselves, they can see the trauma others are going through too. A lot of times I felt really alone—it comes from my abandonment issues—and so I have to do self-talk to pull myself out of that. When I get a trigger, I can see where the trigger is coming from and talk myself out of it. For me spirituality is so huge in the work that I do that I don’t know how to help people heal if they aren’t connected with any sort of spirituality. I ask people I work with, “What do you believe in?” I always tell them that due to the way I grew up, I learned it is ok to believe in all ways (for me that includes Native and Christian spirituality), and I help them heal by calling their spirit back. I see a lot of the healing work starting now because there is so much awareness around the intergenerational trauma issue in and out of faith communities. Currently there is more awareness of Native American people. We felt invisible, and society treated us that way. Now people are getting their voice and seeing how they can move