98 SACREd WOundS societally illegal because they truly believe they are above crime and reproach. This might include any or all of the following— stealing or appropriating community funds into their own accounts, sexual misconduct or even abuse, and being verbally and emotionally abusive of its members or leaders below them in their hierarchy). The above list is not exhaustive, and a false guru might not exhibit all these traits, but it is important to know what to look for to see the difference between healthy spirituality and leadership and that which is destructive and abusive. If you are a spiritual seeker on a path of self-discovery (in religion or out), you deserve to have teachers who are wise and humble along your journey. You deserve to be nurtured— and the above personality doesn’t know how to do that. In truth, it is not even their intention. Their intention is to improve their value and esteem, not to help you grow. Identifying the Wisdom Teacher We could say that to discover a true wisdom teacher philosophically and religiously, just pick the opposite of the false guru and you are in good starting shape. That said, I want to be specific about what the alternative to the false guru looks like. We all deserve at least one good teacher to learn from, especially when it comes to spirituality and philosophical understanding. If you are looking for a teacher, have been hurt before but want to explore the spiritual or philosophical complexities of life, and/or want to find faith that embraces the unknown, then this listing of traits of healthy teachers is a starting point for your journey. 1. Humility over Ego: Wisdom Teachers promote humility in others and most importantly, in themselves. They are always part of community and offer their teachings as learned lessons along the way. Their teachings are not based on their own value or “better than others” nature. In community they make sure there are checks and balances to make sure that if their ego begins to appear, there is an accountability system to ensure they come back down to earth and explore any issues of narcissism. 2. Community over Themselves: While they may be wisdom teachers with experience and knowledge, they do not think of themselves as most important. They want to bring the strengths, WISDOM TEACHERS VERSUS FALSE GURUS 99 values, creativity, and wisdom of the community together for a more diverse and strong whole—rather than a leader-based, top-down system of power with themselves at the top. They are attentive to creating balance and avoiding power and control roles or characteristics. 3. Embracing the Tension: They offer their teachings and life lessons to others but are also able to accept when outside realities or ideas may contrast with what they have learned— they can hold the tension between what they know and don’t know, between their truth and the truth as seen through others’ eyes, and between being wise and needing to learn and grow themselves. 4. Comfortable with the unknown: One of the essential characteristics of wisdom teachers is that they know enough to realize that the universe, cosmos, God, and/or the ineffable can only be understood in a very small portion. They understand that a lifetime of education can only touch the surface of understanding God/the universe/their higher power. 5. They Are Lifelong Students: They are willing and open to sharing that much of spirituality, and faith is unknown and unknowable—and that they, as teachers, still have much to learn as students themselves. They constantly engage with the unknown through meditation, sacred practices, and other wisdom teachers. They understand that learning, growth, and transformation is a lifelong process and are willing to engage with that process for the duration of their own lives. 6. Promote Questions and Don’t Have All the Answers: They don’t pretend to have all the answers and are willing to say, “I don’t know,” or “Let me find out more about that and get back to you.” They believe that human curiosity is a gift and nurture that curiosity and the art of asking questions in others. They want people to question and explore deeper. 7. Low- to No-Cost Teachings: Although some elements of their teachings and programming might have a cost, it is the lowest cost possible, includes many scholarships for those who can’t afford it, and offers most of what they do for free or as close to free as possible. Of course, overhead for certain things require cost, but wisdom teachers are not getting rich and buying mansions off of their work. 100 SACREd WOundS 8. Accepting of Many Ways to Transformation and Spirituality: True wisdom teachers don’t believe their way, tradition, or understanding of the universe is the only one—they are open to many paths to the same source. This is a very contemplative dimension of thinking about the world and engages with the nondual nature of things—meaning that one person, faith, or path doesn’t have to be wrong for another to be right. They don’t see the world as an either-or proposition, but rather a series of trails, which lead to the same loving source—whatever that central source of all things might be called or how it might be defined. 9. Promote Radical Inclusion: They believe that everyone and everything belongs—and we all should have the opportunity to find happiness, love, and understanding. This means that outside of just seeing spirituality or faith as an independent personal journey or a journey for one community alone, that we all walk together, have to care for one another, and open our homes, hearts, and faith to all. This can mean not excluding people from their work or world or value them less because of their race, gender, sexuality, socioeconomic status, or global location. 10. Model unconditional Love and Forgiveness: They believe everyone deserves love, and that love is not conditional on any of the above factors being a certain way. Love is love, and everyone gets the same portion—with no strings attached. They also believe that if a person has done wrong, then they deserve forgiveness—as much for the one offering forgiveness as for the other person. They believe in paths to reconciliation as the answer to conflict, strife, and marginalization of people. That doesn’t mean there is no justice, just that justice is found with loving compassion. They see justice as a difficult path, and one done with a transformed and loving heart is the way to find true personal and collective healing. They model this in their life and works and seek outside input if they get stuck in jadedness and hate. 11. Acknowledge Their own Flawed Humanity: They admit they make mistakes and when they do, they try to be transparent about them and share their hurt and falls as a way to help others learn and grow. They don’t hide their mistakes—they use them to help themselves and others get back up after the falls. WISDOM TEACHERS VERSUS FALSE GURUS 101 12. Value Independence and uniqueness Along with Healthy Interdependence: They believe in the inherent value of community for opportunities to show unconditional love, work through relationship for authentic companionship, and provide accountability for themselves and others. They also value each person and their unique set of talents, history of hurt, and all that makes them who they are—and they honor that person and all their parts in community. 13. Authenticity: They are who they are—without a hidden agenda or secret parts. They work toward deeper authenticity and promote others to do the same. They believe we are all flawed and beautiful. Just as with the false guru teacher, this wisdom teacher reference is not comprehensive, but it is a guide post—if you find people along your own healing path and spiritual or philosophical journey with these traits, then they may be people to spend more time with. Discern in your own life the wisdom teachers of your story—if they follow the above path in some form, they are someone we can all learn from. Since they are open to their own ever-evolving path, they might just learn something from you, too.