164 SACREd WOundS Mama sat down on the mattress next to me; I had just finished packing my backpack for the journey. “This morning I go to temple,” she said in a little above a whisper. She took my hand and opened it with my palm facing upward. “I get this blessed by monks. It is for help and to keep bad things away. Mama is worried about you, but this will protect.” Then she placed into my open palm a bracelet made of black oblong beads and white skulls. She closed my hand and gave it a squeeze and hugged me with such love that it filled me up with the sweet mix of joy and sadness I have only found in truly sacred moments of relationship. I remember sitting on the plane an hour later, running my hand over my blessed bracelet now on my wrist, and beginning to well with tears I could not explain. Even in that moment, it felt potent but odd, and I remember thinking, “Why am I so sad? Why is it so hard to leave this place and this woman I only just met?” There are those moments and those people you carry with you for a lifetime. In life and faith, in all the sweet and bittersweet moments on the rollercoaster of seeking sacredness and spirituality, there are only a handful of moments as powerful for me as those few moments with Mama in that guesthouse in Luang Prabang. Her love was so implicit and sincere. Her generosity, even with nothing to give in the tangible or economic sense, was so much more than I have received almost anywhere else. She is still one of the paragons of true faith and authentic spirituality in my life and heart. It is a rare thing—faith that pure and good. Those are the moments. Those are the moments that beat away with love all the bad ones—from the fanatical Buddhist nun to my aggressive Catholic Monseigneur in childhood to everything in between. There is something about the purity of love that asks nothing and faith that judges no one that makes me want to believe again and again in that ineffable something greater than myself and than all the abusive examples of religion the world could ever offer. Those are the moments that retrieve my faith in humanity and the cosmos from the hurtful and tedious evil that exists in the world. That is the image I want to leave you with—Mama and me in a quietly sacred moment during one summer in Laos. THE CRACkS ARE WHERE THE LIGHT GETS IN 165 May you find your way through lonely nights. May you find rest, and calm and peace from sacred fights. There are hard days. There are deep pains. But tomorrow brings the possibility of hope, grace, love and healing on every new horizon. Seek the healing you deserve. You are worth it.