86 SACREd WOundS Childhood Faith and Life Development As children, we are developmentally meant to begin life with a concrete understanding of the world. This is why it is no wonder that many children’s early imagery of God, facilitated by the nature of icons and storytelling, is very concrete and related to the world they live in. This is why so many children’s early visions of God is a white man with a white beard and a long flowing robe—this is the God-image children have largely been fed, and it is very visual, tangible, and easy for a developing child’s brain to grasp. As articulated earlier in this chapter, for some people that God image was tainted by existing abuses in their family system—if dad was domineering and abusive it was likely that a) father would be feeding a child the image of a similarly abusive God-figure and b) a child would latch onto the identifying qualities of their actual father and attribute the same to a “heavenly” father. Franciscan mystic Richard Rohr once said, “We can’t love an it. We can only love a who.” Especially as children, we can’t identify our belief system based on an “it”—and whether we are taught to love, hate, or fear God— it is always a “who” those feelings are directed toward. Based on the family and faith-of-origin systems, how the “who” is formed and what (inevitably) He looks like may vary some, but the God of childhood has to be human. Children and their child brains don’t and can’t yet reason abstractly or understand abstract symbolism like the cosmos, the universe, or the Holy Spirit. God is a man, according to most interpretations in childhood. For some, He may be a loving grandfather and for others an abusive tyrant, but either way He takes shape as human in our young minds. In many ways, this is also the origin point of the problem later in life. As we grow into reasoning and rational creatures and as we experience pain and suffering, we see people not just in our world but in communities of faith living in ways that might conflict with what the concrete God-father described to the child minds. Most of us were taught a child’s level (or spiritual kindergarten, as Richard Rohr would say) of God and spirituality, and that is where the dogma stopped. The buck stopped at doctrine, rules, and mandates for most people inside of religious traditions, and the world will never match up to the good/bad, black/white absolutes of spiritual kindergarten. The limited faith teaching most people experience mixed with the FAITH OF ORIGIN 87 human flaws of every person—in faith communities or out—can and often will lead to some form of existential crisis, if not by overt traumatic experience, then by the growing capacity of the rational brain in adolescence and early adulthood. We are set up to be jaded if our spiritual teachings and community do not evolve past spiritual kindergarten. If people also experience abuse as their brains develop into adulthood, the religious system becomes a place of disappointing platitudes and the God figure born of a five-year-old. There is no way for this kind of a construct to hold over time. It will fall apart or be burnt down, depending on the level of hurt experienced within a person’s faith community or institution. LIFE PARABLES: Being Hurt By Families and Faith of origin DAVID: For me I think the most disappointing thing all along is that I trust people, so when my leaders or mentors would disappoint or hurt me, that wounded me the most. I have this fantasy of what family should be, but because none of our families live up to the fantasy, we are always disappointed. It is the same with the church; having a fantasy about what church should be, professes to be, promises to be and experiencing the opposite—entrusting self to leaders or mentor and being hurt or betrayed by them, or experience them doing something shocking—that to me has been the most upsetting (it is because of my fantasy for what church could be— rather than dealing with reality). DEANA: My discomfort first manifested as hunger. As a teenager I started questioning everything. Why am I here? What’s the point? How am I supposed to contribute to this world? Does it even matter? Why does it matter if I believe? If belief is all that matters, why can’t I go live on a mountain and be a monk? I needed a lot more than “Stay in church, read your Bible, do your devos,” which is what I had heard from church my entire life. Even when my youth pastors branched out, it was always with some sneaky version of “No sex, drugs, or rock and roll.” These messages all seemed fine and good, but they turned up empty when I was having the existential crisis that is teenagehood. KISHA: ** trigger warning-abuse content** Fortunately, my theology began to evolve into something more positive during the teen years of my spiritual formation, after I experienced trauma at 88 SACREd WOundS the hands of a couple of female mentors who sexually abused me. They were mentors whom I met at church and who were supposedly intended to be spiritual guides and/or extended family members to me. During that time, I reached out to God in the Charismatic way I had been taught, and eventually believed He met me and responded to me. However, that was not my “rebirthing” experience. REFLECTIoN oN LIFE PARABLES While church-hurt and spiritual abuse is not always about emotional, physical, and sexual trauma, or the negation of a person based on race, sexuality, and gender, there are far too many examples where this has been the case to ignore it as one of the primary sources of religious injury. To be hurt emotionally, spiritually, physically, or sexually, or negated based on the basis of who a person is, is a deep and profound wound and should be treated as such. If this is your story, it is valid and valuable. You should never be made to feel less than by someone else’s mistakes—even more so, you should never be hurt in those spaces where you let your guard down the most, where abuse is done by those who are supposed to “represent” divine love on earth. There is no perfect person—and those who try to be that for others often move far off course fast. Some so far that they hurt others based on their own assumption of greatness of self. If you have been hurt by those people, there is no truth, faith, or goodness in it. It is wrong by all standards. The same is true if anyone in a faith context ever told you who you are or what you are is wrong—there is no wrong way to be and live out self and love in the world. Women are equal and good. LGBTQ people are equal and good. People of color are equal and good. If you have been told otherwise, know you are beautiful exactly as you are. Believe that truth about you. You are inherently valuable, just the way you are. No exceptions. Part of healing is believing this is true about yourself to the core—sometimes the hurt perpetrated on us creates a story we believe about ourselves. Don’t believe the myth someone else has created about who you are and what you are worth—you are inherently worthy. A HEALING PRACTICE: Faith of origin Storytelling PART oNE: Tell your “faith-of-origin” story. Tell it however you need to, whenever you are comfortable to do so. Answer the question asked of the interviewees in this chapter: What was your childhood FAITH OF ORIGIN 89 faith and belief of God like? How did you grow up feeling about God? How did you think God felt about you? What were the images in your mind when you pictured God? Jesus? Heaven? Follow up this question with one more set of questions: What was your family of origin like? Did your family/parentage resemble your God figure? If so, how? If not, how? PART TWo: Tell the story you wish you had heard about God (if your faith of origin story was unhealthy for you). Do the same for. your family of origin experience. Begin the journey toward living the life you want by creating the origin story you would have liked. PART THREE: Create a collage of images that symbolize positive family and faith iconography and imagery. You can use any source materials—newspapers, magazines, book content—to make up your collage. Put the collage in a place you see daily; if space permits and it is comfortable for you, put it in the sacred space you created for yourself. Remember what we imagine can influence what is possible. While you can’t go back to the hurtful experiences and change them, you can change your mindset in the present about how they impact you in the present. Take back your power—first in your imagination (which is where we can safely explore freedom) and then in your life. Life Rescripting As we discussed earlier in this chapter, we are given a script at birth, in family, and in community. We acknowledge the impression this life experience has on us, but once we see what it is and understand what it means, we can move beyond this storyline and craft the story of our future as we intend it. Sometimes we can also rescript what was into a larger narrative of our life as a whole. This is the part of the practices where you get to be really inventive and creative. PART oNE: First, you must remember your narrative as it is. For those of us who have lived entrenched narratives, the ones we were given, these are usually very easy to see and manifest. This is the script we play and replay year after year, over and over. This is the one we have to loosen the tether on long enough to envision something new. Initially, we must see what already exists and completely own it. PART TWo: Second, you have to envision beyond what is and what has been to what you want your story to be. For some, this may mean releasing the old narrative; for others, it may mean embracing 90 SACREd WOundS but being able to move beyond the old narrative into something new. Either way, the key is imagination. Imagine what you want for yourself in your life, family, or faith, what you want your story to look like—past, present, and future. Begin to tell that story. Write it down in full-color detail. Make sure to imbed all the senses—taste, smell, sight, touch, and hearing. Write your new script. Then read it out loud to yourself. Reread it as often as necessary. Work this narrative through until it is imbedded in your imagination. Then read it again. PART THREE: The goal of this process is that you will get to a place where you can accept your history—your faith of origin and family of origin—but in a way that it is not all you are. You can see your past, present, and future, as you want to define and imagine them. Repeat the process as much or for as long as possible until you see your story as beyond the narrative you have been given and into the narrative or story you want to manifest. This is the crux of the rescripting process. It doesn’t negate what was or is; it just allows for what might be with the freedom of imagination lived out in daily adult life.