CHAPTER 8 Just for Today The 12 Steps, Community, and Recovery from Religious Injury and Spiritual Abuse The wound is the place where the Light enters you. — Rumi In the fall of 2009, I moved from New Jersey to Southeast Florida. I had just gotten married the previous New Year’s Eve and my husband, Chris, and I had both become tired of long, hard winters, ice scrapers at 6 a.m., and the New York City Metro area five-mile and 45-minute commute. I had previously lived in Colorado, and ever since, I had been aching for a slower and quieter pace of life. Even though my time in Colorado was colored by the fact that I had been dealing with PTSD run wild—post-trauma having fled to the mountains to ease my own traumatic pain—I always told myself that if I had lived in the Rockies in a less chaotic time of life, I would never have left. Chris was feeling drawn to return to Florida, where he had spent the happier part of his life, in the safe space of his grandparents’ home in Boca Raton. He often spoke nostalgically about his summers at the beach, a thousand miles away from the fighting of his soon-to-divorce parents, and the addiction and mental health issues that swarmed around his growing up experience. We were in a place in our personal, relational, and professional lives where we had licked our own past wounds and found healing and 145 146 SACREd WOundS recovery from our pasts—in a good portion if not entirely—and had both joined the counseling profession. I was a trauma therapist at the Department of VA for combat veterans and survivors of military sexual trauma, and he was working for the prison system in an addiction and rehabilitation program for soon-to-exit inmates. We felt driven and passionate about our work, but essentially wanted to do it somewhere with a little more sunshine and summertime, if possible. We landed in Delray Beach, Florida, totally unknowing it was probably exactly the spot in the universe for a trauma therapist and addiction therapist couple to land. Addiction recovery, with the same motivation toward sunshine and summertime, moved to Delray a couple of decades previously and created a large network of treatment centers, halfway houses, and a lively addiction recovery community like nothing I had ever seen before. Instead of one meeting in a church basement once a week, in Delray there was a meeting every hour, on the hour, if you were in the market for it. In truth, besides clients I worked with, until that point I had very little interaction with recovery as a community dynamic. It was one of the greatest gifts to be immersed in. Of course like any group with tenets and doctrine, there are the fundamentalists in recovery, but what I found even more than that was a caretaking community of people in their 20s and 30s, people who would have been anomalous and possibly outcasts in their home cities across the country where a 20-something who doesn’t have a glass of wine or cocktail on a Friday night is looked at as strange, even unwelcome. However, here in Southeast Florida, people were willing to help their neighbors and even strangers, held no judgment for people’s past life errors, pains, or hurts, and offered unconditional acceptance. In many ways, it mirrored for me everything I hoped for religion on its best of days. Much like a system of belief, of course, there were the zealots, egomaniacs, fundamentalists, and condescending personalities. However, the system and doctrine as a whole offered something powerful that I wanted access to in general. In Delray, unlike anywhere else I have known, if you meet someone and they are not in recovery, it is kind of unusual. I felt blessed to have a lens into this private tribe and subculture with principles that had so much to offer for so many. My husband and I started a young adult spiritual seekers group, which was near the downtown area, and so many of our attendees were in early recovery. A spiritual community built up out of the principles these JUST FOR TODAY 147 people lived by—informed by it in their actions, not by any doctrine they espoused. They just acted based off of the principles they had learned in their healing and recovery. They were open, inclusive, and communal, and I deeply believe the spiritual community we have today is just as much so, because of the principles they offer to our space and the Christian content we offer to theirs. It was definitely mutually beneficial. We wanted to create a safe space for people to seek, ask questions, and learn about the good stuff Christian tradition had to offer—a respite for those religiously wounded and a starting point for those wanting some kind of spiritual community but not knowing where to start. That said, like all cultural outsiders (as described in the negation categories of church-hurt), people in and out of faith culture still have stereotypes, stigmas, and negative beliefs about people groups. Although I have become more adept at living the tension of being on the fringe of faith culture—in it enough to hopefully be useful, but out of it enough to not be constantly brokenhearted—there are moments of triggering that sometimes I still can’t breathe through. One of those moments came when a member of my home-base church said recently to my husband, after almost 20 people in our community engaged in baptism as a symbolic connection to their spiritual journey, “Well, they don’t count. I mean they’re not really part of the church. They’re all addicts.” Yep. This happened. So, sadly, yet again, those people who don’t get it are still going to not get it. But I try not to spend my time with that. It is also why those people who separate, segregate, and prejudge or categorize others don’t get the benefit of seeing the sacredness of all paths—and the benefits of connection and communication with other people’s journeys. When we do faith and spirituality well, and share the riches, we can be exposed to systems and communities that have much to offer us. The 12 steps is one of those gems I was gifted with and for which I am forever grateful. Plus, I have gotten used to being the one “normie” (aka not in recovery) person in my usual crowd of friends, although, as I have learned from studying the steps, we are all in recovery from something—especially those of us healing from trauma and emotional wounds. It is a tool I think we can all benefit from, so I want to share a trauma-conscious, spiritual wounds approach to the 12 steps as another tool you may choose to use on your healing journey. 148 SACREd WOundS A 12-Step Path The following is a breakdown of the 12 steps as it can aid all of us in hurt and healing, helping anyone who has been hurt by life, faith, or religion to find a whole, person-centered recovery process. We could all benefit from a whole person and society review of the 12 steps and what, in its healthiest manifestation, it has to offer all humans and especially those seeking healing from traumatic experience. As I will repeat, especially on some of the harder steps, don’t walk this path alone. In the traditional recovery model, this process is meant to happen in community and, at the very least, in partnership with another. This is for both support and accountability. To be this vulnerable, we need to have someone who says it is ok to do so and will hold safe space and unconditional love for us through the process. If you have a group or community you have been sharing your hurting journey with—other survivors—you might want to walk the step together. If you have a mentor, therapist, or life partner, you might want to walk with them through these steps as a support. If you are in traditional addiction recovery, or recovery for codependency, an eating disorder, or sex addiction, or else in another 12-step program, you might want to move through these trauma-conscious steps for faith hurt with your existing sponsor or a new sponsor who might be better suited for this process. If you are in some kind of spiritual discernment or guidance, or are working with a spiritual director, you could work with that person through the 12 steps. You just want to not work through this process or any facet of the healing process alone. There are safe places and people—find them where they are in your world and walk with them for support and companionship on the journey. 12 Steps for the Religious Injury and Spiritual Trauma Experience 1. We admit we are being hurt by our human addictive nature (as it is manifesting as addictive compulsive response to others and as our hurt and anger, and to unhealthy systems/ communities/leaders, etc.). We admit our lives have become controlled by whatever we are addictively holding onto. We all have inherent addiction and compulsions we follow—often to stop hurt; sometimes to numb out enough just to survive JUST FOR TODAY 149 another day. I often say that smoking is a breathing exercise with consequences. Traumatic response is like that—whether we self-medicate with drugs or alcohol, with emotional numbing or dissociation, or with panic attacks or rage—they are all coping skills with consequences. We become addicted to our feelings, hurt, and response to traumatic experience, and sometimes we are still nursing addiction and the suffering of a system/leader who had us rely on them as a the living tools of how to cope or live in life. Sometimes the system we were in is the addiction we are trying to kick. Whatever it is—the addiction is just our human ego trying to find a place to act out its neurosis or narcissism. There is something or some things in our way that we need to let go of—find what those are for you. See what it feels like to stop trying to get rid of it alone. As a good friend of mine regularly says, “We are wounded in isolation; we heal in community.” First we give over our will that we can control everything ourselves, and then we grow in a healthy version of community and/or mentorship to find a healthier way to live. 2. Come to believe that a power outside of ourselves (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me) could restore us to wholeness and health. Whatever it is that is greater than our own fear, anxiety, anger, or ambition can help us heal—this may be moral, religious, or philosophical for you. This could be something offered to you from a wisdom teacher or close friend—something greater than what you know in this moment is the guidepost to your growth and transformation. When we believe we are the ultimate source of all our answers, even if out of fear, we can become like the institutions or false gurus of certitude we left behind. To avoid that, we all have to find reference points greater than us, and what we know today, to guide us forward. Consider who, what, and where you can find those in your own current life. 3. Make a decision to seek safe space, acceptance, and guidance from the power outside of ourselves (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me), and that which manifests as this Power in the world (wisdom teachers, communities, helping professionals, and texts that expand our awareness of self and others, and help us find safety and healing). Especially in early healing and recovery, even more 150 SACREd WOundS so if we have been hurt by other people or people groups, our process of licking our wounds becomes private, which can also lead to feelings of pain, guilt, depression, sadness, grief, loss, and anger, which just stir inside ourselves without any external outlet or resources to help us through the pain. Finding a safe space or spaces with others, master teachers, or therapists or trusted friends, who can help us see outside of the pain and find the beginning path to healing, is essential. Find that which feeds and provides you unconditonal love and acceptance, and nurture yourself while you heal inside of that space[s]. 4. Make a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves to see unhealthy actions, patterns, and behaviors and how they manifest in our own lives—so that we are not doomed to repeat them. In the early stages, the impetus can be to close up internally as a self-protection mechanism and to not see outside of the pain of having been hurt. This can become overwhelming and doesn’t help us move forward on our own path toward healing, wholeness, and discovering our truest and most authentic self. Part of transformation is also introspection to see our own unhealthy patterns—often built out of the trauma experience, what an abuser might have said or imposed, and whatever protective mechanisms we created that are no longer serving us. Seeing ourselves clearly and honestly is a key part to our own healing, growth, and development. 5. Admit to the power outside of ourselves (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me), to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our hurt, broken places, trauma, regret, and moral indiscretions of the past, and how that has impacted ourselves and others in our lives. This part can include telling our stories, but it is also more than just telling—it is telling in a way that is vulnerable, honest, humble, and transparent about our journey and hurting places in our life. It also means we have to see how our pain journey has impacted others and ourselves. Part of any process of transformation, like the 12 steps and this version created around the specific issues of religious injury and trauma, is taking things at your own pace. This step (as all) brings its own sense of difficulty. Be kind to yourself. If you are not ready to go there, hold off. The greatest benefit of this process is that it JUST FOR TODAY 151 is meant to be personal but also communal. Share the journey with someone—a therapist, teacher, or confidant. You don’t have to walk into these difficult places alone. 6. Become open to transforming ourselves with the help of the Power outside of ourselves (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me), and be willing to do the work to let go of whatever we are holding onto from our past that is holding us back or inside our pain and pain experience. This step is a preparation for the work of the steps that follow. We have to be ready and willing in some respect to heal and let go of what is still hurting us about our past. That doesn’t mean forgetting. That doesn’t mean not speaking out. That doesn’t mean not seeking justice. It just means that transformative speak, actions, justice, and living can be most beneficial from a healed and transformed heart. This means you have to be willing to do the work to let go of the pain, suffering, and anger of your past hurt to do better in your life for yourselves and others. It will happen in bits and pieces, not all at once. Like a snake shedding skin, you have to be willing to work to make that process happen and be open to it, one step at a time. 7. With the support of others, our own intention, and the Power outside of ourselves (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me), work to remove those things (listed earlier) that haven’t served us, our lives, or others from our minds, hearts, and spirits—and remove the heaviness on our conscience about these issues. We give ourselves permission to forgive ourselves for anything we are holding onto about ourselves, and our actions. This is the next layer of willingness and preparation—we must prepare our heart, mind, and spirit to let go of that which isn’t serving us from our past behaviors and feelings—and we begin to prepare ourselves to be able to offer forgiveness for the wrongs done to us—more for our benefit and healing than anything else. To be unforgiving is a heavy load to carry. 8. Make a list of all persons we had harmed and become willing to make amends to them all. Make a list of all persons who have harmed us and become willing to offer forgiveness to them. This is just writing the list—which can be taxing but it is preparation or offering the amends to people or, if you choose, 152 SACREd WOundS forgiveness to others. Write the lists honestly and authentically— and be gentle with yourself in the process. 9. Make direct amends to such people whenever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others (or us in context to our healing at this moment in time—we can always return to amend later if it is currently not emotionally safe to address it in the present). Make a conscious effort to forgive those persons, communities, or institutions that are holding onto hate and unforgiveness—this does not mean they are not culpable; it just means we won’t carry around the burden of their wrong deeds on our mind, heart, and spirit. This is a very difficult thing on both ends. It may take time, and some on both lists may take time to address. With trauma, especially hurtful community trauma, this may or may not include an actual formal forgiveness to others—for some people that serves a purpose or a public catharsis. For others, the forgiveness will be private and personal and may just happen in their heart. Sometimes it might include writing a letter that is never mailed to the person[s] you want to forgive. The forgiveness you get unburdens your heart; the forgiveness you give does the same— regret and unforgiveness are heavy burdens to carry, and one of the hardest ingredients of whole person healing is the inner process of reconciliation. 10. Continue to be aware of our actions and motives, and work to remove those things that hurt ourselves or others and are not serving us when we act from an unhealthy, rageful, or wounded place. We will also admit when we have acted from those places to keep ourselves honest and transparent about what we do and why we do it. To continue on the healing path, stay humble, and grow and transform, we have to be honest and authentic with others and with ourselves. If we don’t, our process of healing and growth can stagnate, and we can become entrenched in one way of thinking about ourselves and acting in the world. Constant review of ourselves, patterns, and behaviors is vital to a full and whole life in healing and in general. 11. Practice contemplative methods and practices (mindfulness, meditation, contemplative prayer, etc.) to improve our awareness, consciousness, healing, and transformation as well as to connect with the Power outside of ourselves, whatever JUST FOR TODAY 153 we call it (God, the universe, the cosmos, that which can transform me). Engage in these practices to increase insight and connect with our true and authentic self—so that we might continue to act out of that authentic place and not out of our hurts or anger. Contemplative practice and mind are an essential piece of a balanced life. That is why this practice was in the 12-step traditions from the start, why the contemplatives and mystics from every religious tradition around the world (and their most healing manifestation of religion) include long lineages of contemplative practice, and why even the contemporary mental health community is integrating mindfulness and contemplation to the treatment of everything from depression to anxiety to PTSD. Whatever way you practice contemplation in your life is up to you—it can be in breathing exercises, mindful nature walks, contemplative prayer, or Eastern meditation practices. Find the contemplative path that best fits you and your life, and engage with it deeply and regularly. It is a critical dimension to authenticity, transparency, and transformative healing. 12. Having achieved spiritual insight and awakening, or some form of personal transformation as a result of these steps, we practice offering the message and practice of these steps to others healing from hurt and seeking personal transformation out of their own addiction (to self, others, hurt, unhealthy systems or feelings, etc.). We continue to practice the principles of these steps in our daily life—building and growing our insight and becoming aware and connected with our authentic self as we move deeper into our healing. We are most whole when we can take what we have received and give it away, in some fashion. Share these principles, your journey, and others’ healing path. Help others along the way with what you have learned so far—you would be amazed how much you can help. You are valuable, and your help is needed from someone else walking your same path. Reach out, build community, and be honest and vulnerable enough to help others in community and in companionship. Despite some ignorance still about recovery—as exemplified by the woman in my home community—there is great wisdom in these principles, and I have seen lives riddled by addiction and trauma 154 SACREd WOundS transformed by their content. Like anything, it can’t be the “be-all, end-all” only method on your healing journey. As we transform, we need a variety of things to meet us at each step of the road, but these methods can be great tools for self-discovery when integrated into a healthy healing and recovery path. You can also explore other methods of recovery online—there are meetings all across the country for an increasingly varied number of 12-step programs. The world may be catching up to the inherent truth that if we have an ego, and we all do, then we can be compulsive. Heroin may be an obvious addiction or compulsion, but addiction to power is no less addictive and potentially as destructive. If we can see ourselves as inherently equal to all, then we can see our own human issues as no less problematic or in need of recovery as the person whose addiction stands out as largely as heroin. Use these steps above as you will, if they are useful on your healing path.