THROUGH THE LOOkING GLASS 63 into the fabric of the way things are, and as such not visible enough to address. Common examples of intergenerational trauma might be multiple generations of combat veterans with PTSD, a family of abuse whose parentage and grandparentage includes the same abuse, a family with historic issues of addiction, or suffering generations of marginalized people such as Native families living on an impoverished reservation. In the case of religious trauma, there are many hurtful belief systems, doctrines, and mores, which negatively impact people for many generations. Issues of shame or latent anger then become ingrained in the family or community system. Additionally, if the abuse or marginalization of a gender or sexuality is prominent in a faith culture, then there can be generations of those who are being hurt or abused by the same system all living together and reflecting issues of self-hate or other-hate into the next generation. Secondary Traumatic Stress/Traumatization and Compassion Fatigue Secondary stress is the traumatic stress experienced by persons who sit with the traumatic pain of others, which can include both professionals in the helping field but also those who are the loved ones of trauma survivors. Similarly compassion fatigue is the emotional, psychological, and spiritual exhaustion of someone who sits with people through their pain. In a religious system, this could be people who are working with a community and the survivors of abuse within that community. There have been experiences where people who have been called into the center of a religious community’s abuse scandal end up holding much of the pain and, in extreme scenarios, can even manifest the symptoms of PTSD themselves. Other ways secondary stress can be experienced is in the intergenerational trauma situation where family is experiencing the residual effects of a family member’s trauma; it also can be experienced in the support system of a person experiencing trauma and PTSD. In religious trauma, this can be family members who are not part of the hurting system, spouses or romantic partners, or friends. It is important in the process of any traumatic experience to validate the power of this secondary stress. It is as powerful and real as that of the primary traumatized person and must be addressed with love and kindness, as it requires its own healing.