PEELING THE ONION 117 not “true Christians”. Anyone who didn’t worship with us, in the format we considered right, was deceived and not really Christian at all. As in most evangelical groups, the concept of the doctrine of original sin was one of the foundational tenets. Everything was based on how bad humans are, and how important it is to subdue their pervasive sin nature and achieve holiness. Holiness was manifested in behavior—right clothing (restrictions were heaviest on females), right appearances (attendance at thrice-weekly, multiple-hour services), right economics (owning very little outright, sharing of all resources communally, not possessing anything “too nice”), right observations (no “pagan” holidays, which basically meant no observing of any date, although birthdays were considered “okay if you must”)... and the list went on. Thus my childhood understanding of God was that He didn’t like me very much, even though He loved me (which made no sense to me, so what stuck was that He didn’t like me), and the only way to earn His approval was adhere to the expectations of those “in authority”. Further complicating my experience was the disease of my family life. Both of my parents were raised in horribly dysfunctional families. The marriage of their mutual woundedness created a narcissist/enabler dynamic in which our family life revolved around the emotional status of the narcissist. From earliest memory, I became expert at perceiving unstated expectations, including the expectations contradicting spoken expectations, so that I could “be good enough to be loved.” When I was four, our family left our home state to assist at a community farm that was part of our religious group, and thus began our trek away from extended family, getting farther away geographically and more distant emotionally from them. By the time I was 12, I barely knew anyone from extended family. My grandparents passed away as strangers. My cousins were unknown, other than as names. Aunts and uncles were vague characters in infrequently told stories. We lived in several “community” situations and finally ended up in a rented house in a small northern community, which was the economic “source” for nine different community farms in our religious group. My family never lived in that home alone. We had a variety of people sharing our home—another family of six, a single mother and her daughter, a newlywed couple eventually joined by