118 SACREd WOundS an infant, and a constant stream of single adults who would “come to town” over the winter months to earn money, which they then turned over to the leadership of their community. The message to me was that nothing, not even my parents, were “mine,” and that to wish otherwise was sin. In other words, boundaries were sinful. My most vivid memory from childhood was a keen awareness of the presence of the Divine. I remember as a toddler having conversations with God that were as real to me as my conversations with my parents, and in some ways more real, because I knew God understood me. As a toddler, I had no doubt I was acceptable to and loved by God. This assurance was eroded by outside messages so that by adolescence, I felt as if there were two Divine beings in my life. There was the private Divine, who was reassuring, comforting, and strengthening. Then there was the public Divine, who was disapproving and impossible to please, with hidden expectations. He sent Jesus to live the perfect life, which I somehow got to benefit from, but only if I lived as close to the perfect life as I possibly could. In my early teens, my parents became disillusioned with this group and moved to a nearby town where we lived as a nuclear family for the first time since my preschool years. We attended an “established church” and discovered these “deceived” people actually had real relationships with God. But there were also hidden expectations here as well, reinforced by the expectations woven into my being from the womb. So while I heard far more often now that God loved me, I still felt the pressure of ever-lengthening lists of expectations. I received a lot of adult admiration for my “maturity” and “responsible behavior,” which only intensified my sense of inner striving toward constantly changing goal posts of what a “Godly life” should look like. Woven throughout was the subtext of my parents’ narcissism, which was its own source of changeable expectations and uncertainties. But all of the double-speak felt normal. It never occurred to me there was any other way to exist or relate. Thus when I ended up at a fundamentalist Christian college in Texas at age of 17, the expectations and hidden messages fit right in with what I had known before. I experienced the first romantic attachment of my young life to a narcissistic young man whose dad was also narcissistic. I saw nothing wrong with the way they treated me or those around them. It was in that relationship reinforced by the religious setting that the erosion of my worth as female began its landslide. PEELING THE ONION 119 At the end of my third year of college, I was given the shining gift of a nine-week student teaching assignment that took me to a tiny northern community. There I was gifted with nine weeks of spiritual and emotional intensive care. I lived with a dear Mennonite couple and worked in the church-school of which he was principal. This couple, as well as the church pastor and his wife, showed me unconditional love for the first time in my life. What I received there gave me the soul strength to finish my fourth year of college, as well as call an end to the emotionally abusive “romantic“ relationship. I spent the next eight years trying to return to that place permanently. The two couples continued to support me long distance, and their loving care helped me get through the years that followed. Cult Trauma Cult trauma is a specific kind of religious trauma, even though it may have relationship with a variety of other kinds of religious trauma. Even though we might say there are elements of brainwashing in most systematized belief organizations whose aim is to bring power to few by diminishing or controlling the many, cult mentality is specifically highly focused on having no independent thinking of its members, It isolates the person(s) from any outside communities, especially family, and intentionally hones in on people’s vulnerabilities to break them down. While there are extreme versions of cults that can include things like mass suicide and mass sexual and physical abuses, there are also the subtler forms of cult behavior that may include many or most of the elements above but in a subtler fashion. As previously illustrated, there are yoga studios with power-driven leaders and self-help programs that might qualify as cult type in nature. The religious content and the doctrine and dogma (which usually reaches far from any traditional use or interpretation of the same texts) is singularly driven by enforcing control and serving power to a small number of leaders or a singular leader. Once someone is inside a cult community, it is very hard to extract him or her because if the brainwashing methods are effective, the person will not want or try to leave. The symptoms of traumatic response post cult can be high anxiety, low self-worth and sense of identity, and guilt for leaving the community. Depending on the extent of abuse in the practices of the community, symptoms can include a variety of intrusive thoughts and 120 SACREd WOundS nightmares, especially as the person begins to shed the brainwashing and see the practices of the community as dysfunctional and abusive. LIFE PARABLE: Julie My observations of the church led me to be even more suspicious of Christians than of other people. My dad was kicked out of his first church; it was a very difficult experience for my parents. I loved church because of my faith but was cautious. His third church and final year of pastoring left my mother in a state of complete mental breakdown, with three kids. A difficult situation in a small, private Christian school left me, at the age of 12, in a similar mental state. The only teacher of the small school didn’t like me and made my life a living hell, and eventually I would have to be dragged into the school every day as I clung, crying, to the railing of the steps. Finally my parents took me out of the school after a meeting with the teacher and owners, who told my parents I needed to have a nervous breakdown because I was a perfectionist. After that I was terrified of school and authority figures and when we moved and started going to a large church, I was scared to participate in any of the youth meetings until I made a friend at school who started going with me. Later I went to Bible College where I met my husband, and he was a pastor for one year after graduation, so I was a pastor’s wife briefly at the age of 20-21 in Canada, where I’m from. Shortly after we left that denomination, as we didn’t agree with a lot of the doctrine, and through a series of events, we ended up moving to the United States and got involved with a different group of independent churches that described themselves as reformed charismatic. I would describe them as patriarchal puritans. I now call it a cult, and we spent about nine years there trying to be biblical. That was by far the most damaging church experience I had experienced as they focused almost solely on indwelling sin and how sinful we all are. Pastors had dictatorial authority over members, and men had the same kind of authority over their wives and children. We had three children while there, and I stayed at home where I belonged and asked myself many times a day as I had been taught, “What would my husband want?” It didn’t work out very well, and after a difficult period of questioning, we decided to leave. I was very depressed and suicidal at that point, disdained all women, including myself, and thought I was absolutely worthless.