PEELING THE ONION 121 LIFE PARABLE: Gwen* I am a woman who was raised in Bill Gothard’s Advanced Training Institute (ATI) program. Over the past two years as I have healed from the ravages of abuse, I have found power and healing in telling my story. I remember the first time I told someone I had been sexually abused. I stuttered over the words, cringing in shame and crushed by guilt. The more I tell my story and people witness the atrocities that happened to me, the more I have healed. Today I tell you my story without shame. I was very young when my parents first went to a Bill Gothard seminar. They sincerely believed his teachings were biblical and would “turn the heart of the parents to their children, and the hearts of the children to their parents“ (Malachi 4:6). When I was going into second grade, Bill Gothard opened a pilot home school program, and my parents enrolled us as a second-year family. I was raised for 10 years in the ATI program, and it shaped every part of my being. As a child I was very fearful and craved security. Since that is exactly what the program offered, I embraced it wholeheartedly. I fully accepted every aspect of being under my authority’s “umbrella of protection.” I believed if I aligned even my desires (not just my actions) with the desires of my authorities, I would be the most happy. I remember one time a girl from my church made the comment, “Your parents are really strict!” I disagreed. I replied that actually they don’t have “rules” for me. Instead they have trained my heart to want the very things they want for me, so I simply do what they expect without them having to tell me. This was something the ATI program taught parents to build into their children, and I was proud of the fact that I did it so well. As a result, my teen years were calm and peaceful. I never rebelled. It never even crossed my mind to think differently from my parents. If an authority wanted me to be a certain way, then that was God’s best for me. By this time, I was completely unable to think independently or (God forbid) ever say “no” to an authority. If my authority’s wishes were truly God’s will for my life, why should I ever say no? Ironically, this was exactly the outcome ATI was designed to create, and from the outside I was a complete success. However, in *Extracted from a blog post on Recovering Grace, a forum for survivors of Gothard cult—with permission from author.