36 SACREd WOundS say the camp affirmed all of her mother’s atheist beliefs and certainly helped keep her away from any structured Christianity or dedicated faith tradition to the present-day. With a glint of cleverness in her eye, she closes the story: “I should have just gone with my Jewish friends to their camp. I could have made all the Stars of David I wanted, and no one would have bothered me about Hell, since we Jews don’t even believe in it.” So if you read my opening story and thought, “That seems extreme. I am sure it didn’t happen like that. I’m sure that kind of thing is an isolated incident,” I can tell you that isn’t true. In a divine comedy kind of twist, the first person I disclosed the story to after revisiting and rewriting it, had a more extreme trauma in a near identical camp. I am fairly certain, had I begun crafting Stars of David instead of “only” questioning the heaven theology, I would have gotten the same increase in abusive treatment. As we disclosed our camps to each other, they could have been doppelgangers, twins, twisted sister-sites of fundamentalism, separated at birth. Although in my sample size of two, my facts are anecdotal, they are some pretty convincing anecdotes. In my sample size of two, the number of people traumatized by Fundy camp is 100 percent. As you will see throughout the book, as we explore more people. stories, and suffering, we are at the tip of an iceberg that could take down the Titanic. If in this metaphor the Titanic is Christianity and the iceberg religious traumatization, then we better have a whole lot more lifeboats. This does not mean that faith or those hurt by faith are doomed—only that we must see our weak spots, as people and as communities of people, if we wish to repair rather than destruct the boat we are in. Lifeboats are the issue. If we carry the Titanic metaphor forward, with the iceberg as religious trauma, and the ship as Christianity, then the lifeboats would be those people in faith willing to help heal the trauma faith-based community created. Right now, as it stands, we don’t have nearly enough lifeboats. Right now we are the Titanic. Throughout this book, I will add both to the anecdotal proof that this trauma is more pervasive than you think it is, and there is already available statistical data from such sources as Pew Research Center validating that a sort of “religious exodus” is underway. Let’s consider these people the metaphorical ones, who are diving off the Titanic in desperation into the ice cold INSIDE THE ANIMAL 37 waters below and specifically the Christian exodus, which shows that people are leaving Christianity (and some of the other mainline religions) at alarming rates. In science these are the kinds of statistics that require deeper inquiry. This book is that deeper inquiry. Through the lens of trauma and with the eyes of someone who has been there, I explore the trauma of religion that is dismantling it—like a massive iceberg would slice through a seemingly “unsinkable” ship, so Christianity is being gashed at its core, and its own hubris, like the Titanic, got it here. No ship is unsinkable. overview of Religious Injury The more you understand your brain-body system and how, after traumatic experience(s) you are more prone to have your stress response stuck, the easier it is to tackle the healing process. It doesn’t mean the healing process will be easy; it just means that knowledge is powerful as a first tool of healing. This way it is not a mystery why or how your brain-body reacts—it is just a matter of being a detective of your own system, its responses, and your own traumatic memory roots so you can begin to change your system’s response, which changes how you experience the world. Of course, in religious injury, church-hurt, and spiritual abuse, it is commonly a repeated or elongated process of traumatization— it may be overt traumatic experience, more subtle abuse, neglect, or demeaning behavior that builds over time. Either way, your experience and pain are valid, and there are ways to combat this inner war that plagues many people who experience trauma. This book, the stories, “life parables,” and terms and practices are meant to be a primer for your healing. Your journey of healing will likely include more than this book or its practices. Healing is a communal process, and it can most definitely take a village. In my own healing journey from sexual trauma experienced in my late adolescence (the subject of my first book, Mending Broken ) and years of PTSD, it took a number of villages. Part of my own healing process and the way it wove around my spiritual journey are discussed here, but my village included everything from yoga classes to acupuncture sessions, to contemplative practices and meditation, to writing, reading, and learning everything I could about trauma, and eventually led me on the journey to pursue helping others heal from traumatic experience. 38 SACREd WOundS Your journey is like your fingerprint—uniquely yours. Make your road with whatever materials and tools suit you best. I hope this text serves as a beginning to that journey—both understanding religious injury and some beginning practices for healing. The following is a list of common symptoms of traumatic stress and PTSD. You may experience some, all, or none of these if your stress response has been stuck. If you are experiencing any of the following issues or other alarming emotional or physical symptoms, see a mental health or medical provider to be assessed and begin care for these issues. You can find healing with coping tools and emotional support. Triggers For some, the term triggers might be well known, as it relates to mental health issues and negative experiences; for others it may be a new concept. It is generally the term for anything that instigates a memory, response, or revisiting of a past emotion or experience. In the language of mental health, this is related to something negative, which can bring on a negative response—anxiety, anger, or in its most acute presentation, even a flashback. Examples of Triggers in Religious Trauma In religious trauma, triggers can be certain environments like churches or chapels. They can be certain types of people like authority figures or clergy (or clerical attire). A trigger can be certain language often used in experiences or contexts of traumatic stress in religious settings (such as: saved, salvation, repentance, sin, chosen, believer/ nonbeliever, or general jargon from whatever tradition the trauma stems from, or phrases like “Jesus is my Lord and Savior,” and “Hate the sin, love the sinner,” or similar phrases from other traditions. It could also include certain scents like smoke or incense that remind people of religious contexts. Simple Tools to Address Triggers in Religious Trauma If the traumatic experience or experiences are in your recent past, the safest bet initially is usually to avoid people, places, and things that will trigger a traumatic response. When pain is still raw, it is hard to move through a trigger in a way that is not additionally traumatizing.