CHAPTER 3 Through the Looking Glass Religious Injury and Traumatic Stress In the end these things matter most: How well did you love? How fully did you live? How deeply did you let go? — Buddha I tend to use a lot of Alice in Wonderland metaphors when I speak about trauma and healing. My husband would probably prefer I used far more Matrix concepts—and if that suits you we can go that direction, too. Both Alice and Neo struggled to live in the world as it was, each seeking something greater than the sum of their parts, each coming to a crossroads where they had to choose a potion or a pill to move out of the world as they saw it and into a new reality—one in which everything turned upside down, but somehow truth became far more authentic. In many ways, that is the journey to navigate through suffering—it comes down to the choice to see or not. We can live in the world we have been offered, unexplained, unexamined, or we can choose to go deeper and see all the scary things, but also more acutely, all that is beautiful about reality. As a very small child I used to look at the world as it was and searched for any way to make it more acute, painful or joyful. I just wanted life to be more profound. I would sit in my room or classroom, or at a play-date, and create stories that moved beyond my reality into something I thought would be greater. I was always a dreamer. The learned lessons of life and the irony of life helped me see 59 60 SACREd WOundS that I didn’t need to create a super-reality to experience things acutely. Actually I learned that my hypersensitivity to the world—blessing and curse that it was—would bring me all the acute joy and pain that any one human life could handle. It came in tidal waves and tsunamis, sometimes with excruciating pain and occasionally with excruciating joy, far more powerful and immense than anything my daydreams about superheroes and castles could have ever imagined. I always thought life would never be enough, and along the way, I learned that much of it often felt like too much. Ravaged by identity tectonics in adolescence, a Latina adoptee, born in the Andes, and raised in Jersey suburbia, only an express train away from Manhattan, not quite sure who I was by anyone’s standards, I remember a feeling of being so alone in a sea of activity. Later adolescence brought sexual trauma, with two assaults by different perpetrators, and the grand mountainous landscape of PTSD to navigate for the better part of a decade—ignoring, facing, fighting, and healing through the years. Then, when the altitude of that suffering subsided, I found myself without a country—someone who didn’t know where she came from or where she was going (infertile from endometriosis and unable to get pregnant), plagued again by the “who am I’s” that I thought I had left behind. Moving through that tsunami of hurt, I found myself a year later, hurdling into the onset of fibromyalgia pain and sudden asthma—painful and breathless, acutely alive. I was Alice. I was Neo. I had taken the elixir of true and excruciating life and gotten everything I asked for—each pain surmounting the one before it, both rolling tides and high-reaching mountains of pain. What I learned from that experience is 1) Whatever our expectations of life, we are given much more than we could ever imagine— good, bad, and ugly, 2) Life will always surprise us—painfully and beautifully, often in equal measure, 3) We don’t need to create grand machinations and adventures—life is the greatest and most terrible adventure, without any need for expanding on the script, and 4) We can see what is, take what is given, and grow it into something greater than the sum of its parts. We need to look at life through the looking glass and see what is first. After that we can be liberated from the cage of what we have been given to make it what we want it to be. This is the way we rescript THROUGH THE LOOkING GLASS 61 the journey—this is the sacred trail. Initially, however, we must see the pain for what it is—we have to know our dragons, mad hatters, white rabbits, and Agent Smiths, before we can battle them adeptly and surmount them. We can surmount them—but first we must see them. That is why Neo has to take the pill to see the world as it is— then, and only then, can he battle the evil in his story. Deeper In: Many Faces of Trauma To understand trauma we have to see where it lives, how it manifests, and the many ways we can describe the traumatic experience. Sadly, we are in a human universe in which there will probably be only more, not fewer, permutations of traumatic experience moving forward. The benefit of all these terms is that they validate the human experience of pain and illustrate that different pains, even different traumas, manifest slightly different in the human experience. Childhood trauma is going to have distinct impacts on a person, as is the repeated experience of trauma throughout the lifetime. It can help us identify markers for different traumatic experiences and the uniqueness of the intergenerational or historical traumatic experience and how these might be distinguished from an injury to the moral self. We now can see how living with a person who has experienced trauma or working with trauma survivors regularly can traumatize people. The field of traumatology (study of trauma and practice of treating trauma) is also beginning to isolate different issues specific to someone who has experienced trauma in a religious community setting. The latter is in the infancy stage of both exploration and treatment. The clinical world is only on the precipice of religious injury, or what I am calling “sacred wounds” study and practice. Sadly, the need only seems to be increasing exponentially by the day, as more stories come out about this kind of traumatic experience. In this chapter, we will explore some of the above listed traumatic issues and what traumatic experience looks like in religious contexts, and review some examples of this hurt experience. Developmental Trauma While developmental trauma is not an official diagnosis in the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM), it has become a commonly used term to define trauma experienced by a person while still in 62 SACREd WOundS the developmental stage of life (infancy until the early 20s). What science has been able to illustrate about the developing brain is that it is much more malleable than in later stages of life. Therefore, trauma experienced before the brain is fully developed impacts not just the emotional and psychological state of a person but the actual structure of the brain. As we will discuss in the next chapter, religious and spiritual trauma is often experienced beginning in childhood and, as such, it has to be looked at not as just emotionally detrimental but also as something that might have impacted the way a person thinks. Complex Trauma Complex trauma is traumatic experience beyond a single incident of traumatic experience. This kind of trauma is experienced repeatedly over an elongated period of time and has most often been attributed to situations of domestic violence, childhood sexual or physical abuse, and combat trauma. It also can be a compounding of trauma over the life cycle—the revictimization of someone who might have been abused in childhood and then abused or violated in other ways throughout the lifetime. Often when a person has a traumatic experience that is emotionally unresolved, there is a greater tendency to be abused or violated again; this is known as re-victimization. Throughout this book, we will explore the nature of complex trauma as a common dimension of religious trauma due to how it impacts a length of life, often childhood (thereby also being an issue of developmental trauma), and can often be a precursor to trauma throughout the life cycle. Part of the intention of this book is to provide a way to look at the religious traumatic experience as a means of resolving the pain, suffering, and (in many cases) PTSD experienced by people who have suffered this wound in silence. Intergenerational Trauma Intergenerational trauma is traumatic experience that spans beyond the lifetime of one single person and impacts generations of people. Part of the difficulty of intergenerational trauma follows the logic of the old adage: Those who cannot remember the past are doomed to repeat it. In this kind of trauma, the pain, hurt, and suffering have become so ingrained in not just a person but a family (perhaps even a community) that it can become invisible, woven