Introduction I was invited to be the music minister for a national Episcopal Church conference. In preparing for it, I compiled a list of songs that I believed to be “inclusive.” On the opening night of the conference, I led the gathering in singing hymns with different cultural origins. To close the evening celebration, I thought it would be appropriate to sing “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” sometimes referred to as the “African-American national anthem.” I had heard this song being sung by an African-American congregation and I appreciated the energy and spirit they brought to it. Outside of such a context, the energy is often missing. With the help of the accompanist, I encouraged the gathering to sing “Lift Every Voice and Sing” with more vigor and spirit, and invited them to watch my signal to hold and emphasize certain notes. I was hoping that this effort would make our singing of the hymn more “authentic.” In the middle of the song, I picked up a tambourine and added what I believed to be appropriate accents. At the end, some people applauded. While I was enjoying the praises coming my way, an African-American woman approached. “I don’t know how much you know about this song,” she said to me. “Since you’re Asian, I don’t expect you to know that. So I’m sure you didn’t mean it, but I have to say this: I am deeply offended by the way you did that song.” I was not prepared to hear such a statement. I thought I was being very inclusive and authentic. I swallowed my pride and said, “I’m sorry. Can you tell me what I did wrong so that I won’t do it again?” “This song came out of the struggle of African Americans. It should be sung with more dignity,” she replied. The only response I could muster was, “Thank you for sharing that with me.” I thought to myself: what a trite answer. Did I really mean it? Or did I just want to get rid of her? I did not sleep much that night. I kept replaying the scene over and over again, unwilling to face up to what I had done. From past experience, I knew that whenever I went around in circles, I was surely avoiding something—usually pain. In the middle of the night, I finally admitted that I was hurt. I was hurt because I thought I was trying to be inclusive. In fact, I thought I was doing a good job at it. The part that hurt the most was that not only was my effort to be inclusive not recognized but it actually had the opposite effect. The next morning, I addressed the gathering. “Before we begin this morning, I would like to explain the principles behind the choice of hymns in this conference. I tried to be inclusive in picking hymns with various ethnic and cultural origins. Also, in singing and teaching these songs, I attempted to sing them as authentically as possible. However, sometimes I may make mistakes in my effort to do that. It’s like when someone invited me to dinner and in their effort to include me, they attempted to cook what they believed to be an authentic Chinese meal. It consisted of chop suey and egg fu yung.” They laughed. “Well, sometimes, I do that too. This is part of the pain of living in a multicultural community. If I commit myself to be inclusive, I must face the danger of making such mistakes. So, I want to make a deal with you. If at any time during this conference, I abuse a song from a culture with which you are more familiar, I expect you to let me know so that I can continue to learn and grow from my mistakes. In this process, I also invite to you to recognize my intention to be inclusive.” Graciously, they agreed. I felt the same kind of danger while I was writing this book. I kept saying, “What if I am wrong? What if I offend people in writing this book? What if…?” Then I realized that I am not perfect, and that I probably will inspire some people and offend others. I will just have to face the consequences of presenting this material in written form. What I have attempted to do in this book is to begin the dialogue and theological reflection on what it means, spiritually and practically, to be a leader in a multicultural community. I have approached this topic through biblical reflection, an analysis of the differences in the perception of power in different cultures, theological reflection, and case studies. In the appendixes, I present some practical processes and ideas that I have tested in my work as a consultant in multicultural ministry. I would invite you, the reader, to try them out in your work and ministry. Your feedback is most welcome so that we all can continue to learn to be better leaders in a multicultural world. I want to thank the Los Angeles chapter of the National Conference of Christians and Jews (NCCJ) for getting me started in doing interreligious and intercultural dialogue, especially Lucky Altman. I want to thank my friend Mark Gardner for reading the first draft of this book and giving me constructive feedback. I also thank David Polk for his enthusiasm and support of this book. I thank Steve Rutberg for his patience while I was working night and day on this project. Finally, I want to thank all the groups I have worked within the last three years. Their willingness to experiment with me and give me feedback is what has made this book a reality.