CHAPTER 11 Liturgy as Spiritual Discipline for Leadership in a Multicultural Community They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the L ORD as the waters cover the sea. Isaiah 11:9, RSV M y denomination, the Episcopal Church, spends a lot of time on the liturgy—the forms and rituals of public, corporate worship. We spent convention after convention debating the revision of liturgy in the ’70s. Episcopal Church leaders spend countless hours preparing for the Sunday liturgy every week. Which song to sing? Which “prayer of the people” to use? Who will read the Scripture lessons? Who will lead the prayers? What color banner should be displayed? What theme to preach? On Sunday, it all comes together. The sacraments of the church are realized, and, hopefully, the presence of God is recognized and revealed to all who participate. Liturgy is a prescribed format of words and interactions that create a sacred time and space in which the people of God may experience the holy. It is amazing and puzzling to me to see churches, which spend so much time in preparing their liturgies, spend so little time preparing for meetings, especially meetings involving more than one cultural group. We devote so much time making sure the Spirit may flow during the liturgy, but when it comes to a meeting, we do nothing, as if we rely solely on the Spirit to do her job alone. A sense of co-creation is lost somehow. We leave the interaction and the form of the meeting up to the person in charge. Depending on this person’s cultural and professional background, the meeting proceeds with or without intentional input from our faith and our knowledge of liturgy. For example, I have seen many group ministries grow and flourish for a year and then disappear. When I ask the people why, they say that their leader, who was “wonderful,” had left to do something else and then the ministry fell apart. Leadership in the church outside the liturgy lies heavily with the leader. Since we have this person-centered bias in church leadership, we spend hour after hour, conference after conference, training persons to take leadership in the church. Since these training programs depend on the trainer’s skill and knowledge, the level of skills acquired vary from person to person. As a result, the fate of the many churches’ group ministries becomes a roller coaster ride of ups and downs depending on the person in the leadership position. In a multicultural situation, this person-centered leadership style is even more problematic. Depending on his or her cultural background, the leader could function in a volunteer style or a directive style. If this person does not have intercultural awareness training, staying with these styles of group interaction will most likely exclude some people or the leader will be challenged by others in the group. Intercultural sensitivity takes time and training. We cannot assume that all our leaders are interculturally sensitive, nor can we ensure that every leader is trained to be interculturally sensitive. The concept of liturgy may provide a solution to this problem. In a liturgy, all the leaders work with the prescribed forms that govern the interaction of the gathering. A liturgy has essential components, and each component is protected by the community’s affirmation of such a form. For example, the Holy Eucharist in the Episcopal Church must have the following components: gather in the Lord’s name, proclaim and respond to the Word of God, pray for the world and the church, exchange the peace, prepare the table, make eucharist, break the bread, share the gifts of God, and dismiss the people. In that sense, the liturgy itself is the leader. A liturgy centers around a form. If a priest strays from this form too far, the whole congregation would know and take action to correct it. Even though the priest still has a lot of power to control how the liturgy should proceed, he or she cannot abuse that power because of the public knowledge of the form. If the form is understood and affirmed by everyone in the community, there is a corporate sense of making sure that the liturgy is done right so that the presence of God is known through it. Another advantage of having a liturgy is that it reduces the amount of training time for someone to participate in leadership positions. For example, it would take a lot of time to teach someone how to conduct a public prayers section of the worship. With a liturgy, you need only to have a copy of the written form of the prayer of the people and simply invite the person to read it. The only training needed is how to read aloud in public worship. Also, to lead a liturgy one does not have to understand everything that is in it. There is a sense of mystery. Liturgy does not talk about what each word and interaction means but simply immerses participants in the form. Through this immersion, participants gain a fuller knowledge of God “as the waters cover the sea.” We must shift the church’s leadership style from person-centered to form-centered—that is, transform the skills needed to manage a multicultural group into liturgies. These liturgies would enable people from different cultural backgrounds to coexist side by side without hurting each other. These liturgies would create a holy mountain on which the Peaceable Realm can be realized. If such liturgies exist, then the only training needed for our church leaders is the implementation of the liturgies. The Mutual Invitation process described in Chapter Nine is one such liturgy. In the “holy” space and time set up by this process, each person has power to communicate and is respected and listened to. A leader may not understand how this process empowers some people and humbles others. As long as the leader values the process—this liturgy—true communication and mutual empowerment will happen. This happens just as a liturgical leader might not understand the mystery of how the bread and wine in the eucharist become the body and blood of Jesus Christ. By following the prescribed action and words, it happens. I once asked Walter Wink, the author of Transforming Bible Study, how his method of Bible study worked. He said that many theories could be used to describe the working of this process. Even so, he did not understand it completely. But he did know that whenever he did it in the same way, the process somehow transformed people’s lives. What would a liturgy for a multicultural gathering look like? This is a key question that I reflect upon every time I design a workshop or a conference for an intercultural encounter. I want to share with you some of the insights I have gained from my work in search of such a liturgy. The following elements have to be included in the process of the gathering: A clear description of the purpose of the gathering. Clearly stated ground rules of interaction affirmed by everyone in the gathering. Clear procedural instructions before each segment of interaction. A segment of time for building interpersonal relationships. A segment of time for working together on tasks. Reflection on the experience and the recording of important learning. Discussion of how to apply the learning to future gatherings. This process implies very careful planing before each gathering. It also implies that the process will continue to evolve because the learning you gain from doing it will help you redesign the next gathering. Here is an example of what a liturgy for an intercultural dialogue group looks like. I. Opening Prayers and Purpose of Gathering The leader may read the following opening prayer or some other suitable prayer. Let us begin our meeting with a prayer. Let us pray: O God, you made us in your own image and redeemed us through Jesus your Son: Look with compassion on the whole human family; take away the arrogance and hatred that infect our hearts; break down the walls that separate us; unite us in bonds of love; and work through our struggle and confusion to accomplish your purposes on earth; that, in your good time, all nations and races may serve you in harmony around your heavenly throne; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The leader continues by reading the following purpose statement of the gathering. The purpose of this gathering is to bring together people from diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds to engage in dialogue with each other. True dialogue is a conversation on a common subject between two or more persons of differing views. The primary purpose of dialogue is for each person to learn from the other so that he or she can change and grow. 1 We believe our commitment to dialogue with each other will effect constructive change in race relations within the church and in the communities in which we reside. In the next two hours, we will introduce ourselves to each other, share some childhood experiences, and begin to look at the values that we have. II. Communication Guidelines 2 (Ground rules) Hand out copies of “Communication Guidelines” (see below). The leader gives the following explanation: We, people from different cultural backgrounds, bring with us different assumptions of communication styles. Sometimes, these different assumptions can cause misunderstanding among the participants. Therefore, before we begin our dialogue, we must first state a common communication guideline that we all can agree upon. The leader or a designated person will read the Communication Guidelines. We are not here to debate who is right and who is wrong. We are here to experience true dialogue in which we strive to communicate honestly and listen actively and openly to each other. (For religious groups, dialogue is never an opportunity for proselytizing.) We invite you to open your hearts and minds to experience new ideas, feelings, situations and people even though, at times, the process may be uncomfortable. Our leaders are not experts. Their role is to provide a structure and process by which we can better communicate with each other. We recognize that we might have preconceived assumptions and perceptions about others. Some are conscious; some are unconscious. We invite you to be aware of how they influence the way you listen and interpret others’ words and actions. We also invite you to be aware of how these assumptions affect the way you speak and act in the group. In doing so, we can better maintain our respect for and acceptance of self and others as valuable human beings. We invite you to take responsibility for what you say and what you say on behalf of a group. We also invite you to speak with words that others can hear and understand and, whenever possible, use specific personal examples that relate to the topic being discussed. We invite you to expand your listening sense to include not just words but also feelings being expressed, nonverbal communication such as body language and different ways of using silence. We invite you to take responsibility for your own feelings as they surface. Feelings may be triggered by particular words or actions but they may or may not be directly related to the particular interaction. When that happens, simply communicate that feeling without blaming others. In doing so, members of the group can hear and learn constructively the consequences of our words and actions. We invite you to hold the personal information shared here in confidence because only in this way can we feel free to say what is in our minds and hearts. After reading, the leader may ask participants if there are questions and discuss the Guidelines briefly. III. Describe the Mutual Invitation Process In order to ensure that everyone who wants to share has the opportunity to speak, we will proceed in the following way: The leader or a designated person will share first. After that person has spoken, he or she then invites another to share. Whom you invite does not need to be the person next to you. After the next person has spoken, that person is given the privilege to invite another to share. If you don’t want to say anything, simply say “pass” and proceed to invite another to share. We will do this until everyone has been invited. During this gathering we will use this method of sharing at least three times. After that, we can open the floor for general discussion. Is there any question about the process? If this is the first time this group uses Mutual Invitation, the leader might want to demonstrate how it may work. IV. Dialogue The leader will introduce the first topic of sharing. I now invite you to share on the following topic, using the Mutual Invitation process: Give your name. What are your hopes for this dialogue? What brings you to this dialogue group? The leader models by sharing first and then starting the Mutual Invitation process. After the first round, the leader introduces the next topic and process. Consider a time in your childhood when you realized you were “different.” The difference might be your gender, race, class, religion, language, etc. I invite you to spend ten minutes drawing a picture depicting this memory. You may want to represent this memory literally or symbolically. We are not looking for artistic ability here but insights and honesty. Please do this in silence. After participants complete the picture, the leader gives the following instructions: Continuing with the Mutual Invitation process, I now invite you to share your picture. If you wish, before you share your picture you may spend some time describing where you grew up and how your family spent time together. The person who shared last in the last round may invite a person to start. After everyone has shared, the leader invites participants to take a ten-minute break. When everyone returns, the leader introduces the third topic. The next topic I invite you to share is: What is one value that I learned from my parents that I would like to pass on to the next generation? Again, the last person who shared may invite the next person. After everyone has shared, the leader opens the floor for discussion. Are there clarifications that you want to ask each other? Does anyone want to add anything to what they have said? V. Reflection on the Experience The leader helps the group to reflect on the experience by asking the following questions: How did you feel about today’s session? What did you learn? How can we as a group improve our communication with each other? The leader writes down learning and future improvements on newsprint. VI. Closing Prayer The leader closes the meeting by saying the following: I thank all of you for sharing. I hope that you will come back for our next meeting. To close our time together, I invite you spend a moment to complete the following sentences: I thank God today… I ask God today… Allow a period of silence. The leader continues. Let’s join hands in a circle. I will start by sharing, “I thank God today, and I ask God today….” After I am done, I will squeeze the hand of the person on my right. That will be the signal for him/her to offer his/her prayers. When she finishes, she then squeezes the hand of the person on her right. If you don’t want to say anything, just pass the pulse to the next person. When the pulse comes back to me, I will start saying the Lord’s Prayer and I invite you to join me. * * * This is a two-hour liturgy for a first-time intercultural encounter group. Notice the detail of the script. It is just like a liturgy that one would follow in a worship service. It requires the leader only to know how to read clearly and have some basic group skills. Let me go through this process step-by-step to explain why each step is necessary. (1)A clear description of the purpose of the gathering. In multicultural groups, people come to a gathering with very different expectations. For example, one person might expect to make decisions that could effect immediate change. Another might expect simply to make some new friends. And another might expect to tell the others what the problems are. In order to avoid a misunderstanding, it is crucial to state clearly the purpose of the gathering and define any terms that may have different cultural interpretations. In this case, the opening prayer helps put the gathering in the context of our faith, and the purpose of the gathering and the term dialogue are explained. (2) Clearly stated ground rules of interaction affirmed by everyone in the gathering. This step is accomplished by the section on Communication Guidelines. People from different cultural backgrounds will bring with them assumptions of communication styles. Ground rules invite participants to leave their assumptions behind and affirm a common set of guidelines for behavior and attitudes. In other words, in multicultural settings ground rules serve to develop a temporary culture that is shared by the group at the moment. This communication guideline serves to remind participants that communication is more than just verbal interchange. It involves the whole person: attitudes, speaking, listening, body language, interpreting, etc. It also reminds the participants that there are differences in communication styles among people with different cultural backgrounds. Even though participants may not know what all this means, it is important to communicate it and, at an opportune time, refer back to it. A good time to do this is during the “Reflection” segment. Ground rules are important also to pull the group back to a working state if participants exhibit unacceptable behaviors. It may seem tedious to read all of this material so early in the gathering, but experience shows me that if I don’t do it in such detail, people will forget and the time it takes to bring the group back will be much longer than the time spent earlier in the process. (3) Clear procedural instructions before each segment of interaction. Clear instructions help the participants to know what to expect. The level of anxiety decreases as you let the participants know more of what is to come. With Mutual Invitation, the participants know from the beginning that they will have their fair share of time to say what they have to say. Clear instruction here eliminates the anxiety of deciding when to speak up. Clear instruction also helps participants to help each other to proceed. Very often, people who have an unsure sense of personal power forget to invite the next person. With clearly described instructions, group members usually will remind each other to take the privilege of inviting seriously. (4) and (5) A segment of time for building interpersonal relationships and a segment of time for working together on tasks. Since the task of this session is to build relationships and understanding, the three rounds of Mutual Invitation take care of both of these segments. At a later dialogue session, the “task” segment may include a session on planning a program for the church and the community or some other concrete task. The use of a group medium, such as drawing a picture, provides an alternative to verbal communication and gives participants another channel to express themselves. The break after the second round of sharing is very important. Up to that point, they have been sharing in a very formal way by inviting each other. The break provides an informal time for people to get to know each other and share some insights. (6) and (7) Reflection on the experience, the recording of important learning, and discussion of how to apply learning to future gatherings. Incorporating reflection time is essential if the group is to grow together. Capturing the learning in both content and process helps participants remember and incorporate their learning in their lives and ministries. Here is where the lions realize that they are lions and the lambs find out that they are lambs. Here is where they can learn concrete ways to continue to realize the Peaceable Realm. If there is something good, talk about how you can recreate it and make it better. If something did not go as well, talk about how you can change it next time to correct the problem. * * * Once you have a liturgy that works, you can keep the same structure and change the content. In this case, the three topics of discussion can be replaced with new questions and topics in the next session of dialogue. One can also replace the second round with other group media such as Photolanguage, posters on the wall, meditation with a song, a written reflection form, etc. The rest can more or less stay the same. Experienced group leaders will resist using a script. It may feel wooden and without life. My advice is to start with following the script as closely as possible. This will give you the feel of how this particular process works. Also, it will show the other, less experienced participants that they can be a leader too. Following a script that works and consistently doing it the same way is an empowerment process. Eventually, when you are ready to move on to do something else, it is easy to find a replacement. Anyone in the group will be able to do it because the person is not the leader—the liturgy, the form, is. I have included in the appendix the “Community Bible Study,” which is a well-tested multicultural process. It is a liturgy written for Bible study. I have tested it for more than three years with many different groups. The requirement to lead such a group is to be able read and do no more than one hour of research for a five-minute presentation. You will also find in the appendix detailed descriptions of the “Mutual Invitation” process and “Using Photolanguage in Small Group Communication.” These are well-tested liturgies for multicultural groups’ work. A major part of spirituality is discipline. In the Christian monastic community, the discipline of moving through the day with daily offices and communion is the backbone of their spirituality. These liturgies, as prescribed by the community, shape, reshape, and inform members of the community in both explicit and implicit ways. I was working on this book in a monastery. On the first day, I was quite annoyed by the interruption of the bell calling everyone to attend the daily office five times a day. Every time, I had to drop what I was writing, move into a worship space, and shift my mind to a liturgical mode. However, by the second day, I realized that these breaks from my writing were actually good for me because every time I returned from chapel, I got fresh and new insights for my book. The daily prescribed services forced me to behave and think differently from my intellectual routine when I was writing. These intentional changes helped me to see my routine in a new light. In a multicultural community, this kind of discipline is even more crucial. The discipline of practicing the “liturgies” for multicultural gatherings can cause us to break from the routine of our unreflective cultural pattern. In the process, we can see ourselves and our cultural patterns and values more clearly, and we can become more sensitive to different cultures and more skilled in realizing the Peaceable Realm. 1 This definition of dialogue comes from the guidelines for dialogue of the Los Angeles Chapter of the National Conference of Christians and Jews (NCCJ). According to their source, this definition is adapted from Leonard Swindler’s article “Dialogue Decalogue.” 2 This set of Communication Guidelines is based on an approach developed by the staff, particularly Lucky Altman, of the Los Angeles Chapter of the NCCJ for use in their dialogue process.