CHAPTER 3 Differences in the Perception of Power and Their Consequences for Leadership I n the last chapter, I made the generalization that people of color tend to perceive themselves as powerless and whites tend to perceive themselves as powerful. It is very important to recognize that this perception of power is a continuum along which people from all cultural backgrounds fall. All I am saying is that on the powerful end there is a higher concentration of whites and on the powerless end there is a higher concentration of people of color. Cultural differences, social prejudice, economic factors, and education all play a part in creating this dichotomy in the United States. The consequences of this difference in perceptions of power are many. It affects communication, work relationships, family structures, and our education system, just to name a few. In other words, it affects all aspects of our society. In this book, I would like to concentrate on leadership styles and group dynamics. The definition of a leader is not the same in different cultures because how a person is expected to manage a group is dependent on the group members’ perceptions of their own power. How do you lead a group of people who believe they are equal to you? How do you lead a group of people who defer to you for all the decision making because you are the authority figure? How do you lead a group of people whose perception of their power spreads from one end of the power perception continuum to the other? These are important questions to answer if the church is to raise up leaders who are able to build faithful communities in the midst of a multicultural society. I learned in seminary how to work with groups. The seminary I attended provided a predominantly white, English-speaking environment. Therefore, the group process I learned was based on the cultural assumptions and values of the white, English-speaking middle class. Take leading a Bible study group as an example. The method I learned involved asking a series of questions coupled with an experiential exercise. The purpose of the exercise was to help the group delve deeper into the meaning of the text. I did not realize how culture-bound this method was until I facilitated a Bible study group for a Chinese-speaking group. Everything I learned about group process and facilitation of dialogue around scripture did not work. I would ask a question and the response was always a painful silence. I would ask for volunteers to participate in an experiential exercise. No one would volunteer. As a result, I ended up doing all the talking to explain what the text meant to me. I discovered another problem with my leadership style when I encountered multicultural groups. The white members of the group would disclose their insights and thoughts verbally and freely while the people of color would just sit and listen. The more I tried to include them, the worse it got. These experiences forced me to explore new models of leadership that took into account cultural differences and how they could affect the way we relate to each other in a multicultural group. Depending on the cultural contexts, a group’s expectation from the leadership could be very different. Leading or facilitating a group has to do with power—power to influence others and being aware of the power dynamic among the group members. Therefore, it is very important for a group leader first to determine where he or she is in the power perception continuum. How does it influence the way she behaves and interacts with others? What assumptions and expectations does he bring to the group? Secondly, when the group leader is in a multicultural situation, there is a need to know where the people are on this power continuum. If all participants have a strong sense of their own individual power, then everything learned in white middle-class group processing would be helpful here because everyone believes that he or she is equal to everyone else unless there are “experts” in the room. A good leader is someone who enables the group to do what it needs to accomplish. People are expected to volunteer their thoughts, feelings, and talents. Differences of opinion are debated verbally. A good leader attempts to get consensus from the group. Decisions can be made by compromising. When a consensus or compromise cannot be reached, decisions fall back on voting. Robert’s Rules of Order is a prime example of group process based on these assumptions. Voting, when it is not unanimous, presumes that there are winners and losers. Groups with these kinds of assumptions automatically set up a competitive environment. An image of a good leader in a white group is a pre-traffic-lights traffic cop who stands on a platform in the middle of an intersection. His or her job is to keep all the self-moving autonomous individuals from colliding with each other. The worst of the leaders in this setting is someone who sits back and lets people fight and escalate the conflict, all in the name of democracy and respect for individual opinion and freedom. Then when things get out of hand, the leader comes in with his or her own agenda and says, “See, I gave you the power to decide and you can’t seem to be able to do it. So why don’t you let me decide for you?” If everyone in the group falls on the other end of the power continuum (that is, they have a fragile sense of their individual power and would not challenge authority), someone will have to take charge and be the authoritative figure. The authoritative figure is usually the designated leader of the group. If no one takes on this role, nothing will get done. A good leader is sensitive to the needs and talents of everyone in the group. An image of a good leader is an octopus who has its tentacles extended into the different parts of the community. This person has a network of trusted people who give him or her information about what the community wants, who wishes to participate, and who has the gifts to fulfill the tasks. This person spends a lot of time before a meeting to acquire the essential information. At the meeting, the concept of invitation becomes very important because no one will volunteer. The leader has to invite people directly to offer their ideas and services. The leader will have difficulty if there are power struggles between two or more persons who believe they all have authority in the group. The worst of the leaders in this kind of group are those who use their power to push their own agenda because in such a group no one will challenge their authority. What happens when you have a mixed group—say, one half is white and the other half is people of color? Remember that this does not happen just in a culturally mixed group; it also can happen in a mixed class group. Whenever I am in such a group, I usually observe the following pattern: White Group White group members participate as they always do, and talk when they have something to say. If they disagree with someone, they disagree with them verbally and openly. Pretty soon, they realize some others are not speaking. So, with all good intentions, they try to include them by giving subtle hints because it is not considered polite to put people on the spot. It usually comes out like this: “I think everyone should jump into the discussion, if you have something to say; there is no need to be shy about it.” The more they try, the more the people of color close up. As a result, they make decisions without the input and concordance of the people of color members, even though they appear to have consented to it. Then, the people of color get blamed for not participating. Occasionally, some white members feel guilty about dominating the group once more. People of Color Group People of color take part in the group by expecting an authoritative leader to tell them what will happen and what to do. Instead, they hear many people talking without being invited to speak first. The assumption then is that these people must have a great deal of power and authority; so they let them talk and do not challenge them. Then, the white members of the group start hinting that they should be talking also but without a direct invitation. This may be what was going on in their minds: “If they really want my opinion, why don’t they come out and ask me? Apparently, I am not smart enough,” or, “How can I speak when there isn’t any time to think about what I want to say?” As time goes on, they feel more and more inadequate. “And then they made decisions without asking me to contribute or do anything—I must be worthless.” When the meeting ends, they leave and refuse to come back again. What happens is that the white members of the group, by behaving “naturally” according to their cultural upbringing, are being perceived as superior by the people of color and, therefore, are given power over them. The people of color, by seeing the situation from their cultural point of view, do not know that they are perceived by the whites as equal partners in the group. The lack of understanding of this difference in the perception of power, on both sides, leads to a situation of injustice. The white group has more power than the other by controlling the agenda and decision making and unintentionally excluding the people of color. This is not the fault of any group involved. Members of the two groups, by being themselves, create a power dynamic that is like putting wolves and lambs together in one room. Something bad is going to happen because of the different “natures” of the two groups. In an ethnocentric way, most whites believe that inequality can be countered by simply physically including the powerless and the disadvantaged. They think that by inviting an individual representative from the powerless group to join them, they are able to redistribute power more evenly. The assumption is that everyone is equal to each other as individuals and everyone is expected to participate “fully”—meaning being able to speak for himself or herself. The truth is that not all believe they are equal to each other. I have already explained why this is. Another reality is that not everyone is an individual who can speak for himself or herself. Many people of color come from cultures that emphasize the collective over the individual. 1 It is very hard for them to speak as individuals. They feel powerless without their community behind them. This explains why tokenism doesn’t work. Inviting only one representative strips the power of the person by not including a collective group from which he or she comes. This is a typical response when a church organization is confronted with not having the “proper” ethnic representations: “We invited them; they came once and didn’t participate. Then they stopped coming. Can’t say we didn’t try!” This approach is what I call the ethnocentric way of doing justice. Ethnocentricism assumes one’s culture is the only and superior way. With it comes the assumption that everyone should be and is like me. For whites, this means assuming everyone is equal to me in his or her power perception. Doing justice is very simple. We need only to physically include the excluded. The assumption is that once they are there they can play the power game just like us. This kind of approach to racial injustice is typical not only in churches; it also appears in the political and economic arenas of our society. Busing in the early seventies was based on this ethnocentric way of doing justice. With this assumption, we transported a small group of black students to a white school, believing that physical inclusion would take care of the problem of racial injustice. Contrary to what people expected, this kind of action actually created more unjust situations such as the one I have described. Justice in a multicultural setting has to be approached in an “ethnorelative” way. 2 We begin by accepting the reality that people’s power perceptions are different because of cultural differences. By analyzing these power perceptions and how they are relative to each other, we will see that there is a great disparity of power between the two groups. Based on this knowledge, we need to create an environment that allows people to interact with equal power and therefore redistributes power evenly. In other words, white members of the group need to know that they are perceived as powerful right from the start of the interaction and need to give up power in order to make themselves truly equal to others. People of color need to know that they are valued as equals and need to find ways to gather together a critical mass so that they can speak with power and as a collective. In a multicultural community, we can no longer train leaders ethnocentrically. We can no longer assume everyone is like us in their power perception. We can no longer do justice by simple physical inclusion. We must move from our ethnocentric way to an ethnorelative way of doing justice. We must train leaders to be more culturally sensitive, especially to their own sense of power and how they are different from people with different cultural backgrounds. We must train leaders to do power analysis based on their cultural sensitivity. Only in this way can we be truly inclusive. Only in this way can we move from mono-cultural leadership to multicultural leadership. In the following chapters, I shall address the injustice created by the difference in power perceptions. I shall do this first theologically through studying the scriptures. Then I will explore practical ways of addressing the issue through case study and new designs of group processes. 1 For a detailed discussion on individualism/collectivism, read Geert Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences—International Differences in Work-Related Values, abridged edition (Beverly Hills, London, New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1987), pp.148–175. 2 The term ethnorelative was used by Milton J. Bennett to describe the latter three stages of intercultural sensitivity. Bennett, “Towards Ethnorelativism: A Developmental Model of Intercultural Sensitivity,” in Cross-Cultural Orientation: New Conceptualization and Application, ed. by R. Michael Paige (University Press of America, 1986), pp.27–69.