Appendix B Using Photolanguage in Small Group Communication Objectives: (1) To help members of a small group to communicate in a holistic way that engages the visual, the affective, and the intellect. (2) To help members of a small group to get to know each other and/or to explore a specific topic together. Type of Group: Any. Size of Group: 8–20. Setting: A bright, large room. Chairs for participants should be arranged in a circle in one area of the room. In a separate area of the room, set up three or four large tables that can accommodate the display of all the photos without crowding. Make sure there is room around each table for participants to move around. If tables are not available, sometimes displaying the photos on the floor may be acceptable if you have a very bright room. Materials: A set of Photolanguage: Interactions 1 by Eric Law. Newsprint and markers. Time Required: One hour or longer depending on the size of the group. How to Proceed: 1. Preparation Write the questions you want the participants to explore on the newsprint—large enough to be seen at a distance. Give participants at least two questions: one general and the other more specific. Here are some examples: Example A: Say “Who are you?” and/or “How are you feeling now?” in one or two photos Example B: Say “What is racism?” and/or “How has racism affected your life?” and/or “What is it like being a victim of racism?” in one, two, or three photos. Example C: Say “Who are you?” and/or “What is your relationship with God?” in one or two photos. Example A is a set of questions that helps a group to get to know each other. Example B is a set of questions that helps a group to explore a specific subject. Example C is a set of questions that does both. ( Interaction by Eric Law is best used to explore relational questions.) 2. Instructions to participants Invite participants to sit in the circle. Give the following instructions: Very often in group communication, we are asked to express ourselves in words alone. In culturally diverse groups, verbal communication alone is not sufficient because different cultures have varying degrees of comfort with verbal communication. In order to help us communicate better, I have brought a tool with me. There are about fifty photographs on the tables. Instead of asking you to begin our sharing with words, I invite you to communicate in a different way—that is, with images. There are two (or three) questions posted on the wall. I invite you to answer one or both (or three) questions with one or two (or three) photographs. ( Repeat the questions.) You can answer one question with two photos or two (or three) questions with one photo or any combination in between. Do not think about what image you want to answer the questions. Rather, just gently plant the questions in your mind and when you are ready, go look at the photographs. Let the photos speak to you first. If a particular photograph catches your attention, stay there and dialogue with the photograph. Ask: Why is this picture catching my attention? Does it answer the questions posted? How? When you finish the dialogue with the photo, move on. If another picture catches your attention, stay there and do the same thing. Do this until you have looked at all the photographs. When you have done so, mentally pick the photos that you want. Do not pick them up physically because if you do, someone else might miss the chance of sharing those pictures with you. When you have picked your photos mentally, just come back to the circle and sit down. And when everyone comes back to the circle, that means all of you have picked your photos. Is there any question on how we will proceed? Now, I invite you to be silent for a minute and plant these questions in your mind. ( Repeat the questions again.) When you are ready, you may go and look at the photos. Please do this in silence. When everyone comes back, give the following instructions: Let’s go to pick up our photos. If your photo is not there, that means someone will share that photo with you. Just come back to the circle and see if it is in the circle. When participants return with their photos, invite them to put the photos facing up on the floor so that everyone can see them. Introduce Mutual Invitation (See Appendix A ) as a process for the group to share their photos. After everyone has shared, use the rest of the time to draw some connections, syntheses, new insights, common themes, and/or opposites that have come out of the sharing. Stop any psychologizing on a particular person in the group. Limit questions to clarification ones only. Closing: There are a variety of ways to end the session depending on the intensity of the sharing. Here are three examples: A group hug. Put all the picked photos in the middle of the circle. Invite participants to spend a period of silence to look at the photos and connect the photos with the persons who picked them. Prayers may be offered in silence. End with the Lord’s Prayer. If the group will use the same room for a longer period of time as in a retreat, put the picked photos on the wall. This can create ownership of the space for the group. If this exercise is used in the context of a Eucharist, the picked photos can be placed around the altar during the offertory. Problems to Anticipate: Remember: this is a communication tool, and not a psychological tool. The facilitator must help the participants stay at the communication level and respect what is shared as information offered by the participants. The sharing should not be used to make psychological inferences. One good way to avoid this is to invite people to use “I” statements when making a comment and to ask only clarification questions. Origin of the Process: I learned how to use Photolanguage from Alain Baptiste, one of the originators of this tool, in Lyons, France, in 1980. I have added Mutual Invitation to the process to enhance the use of the tool especially for multicultural groups. Other Ways of Using Photolanguage: I have described a well-tried way of using Photolanguage. There are other ways to use it. Here are some examples: Pick a photo and write a poem from it. Start a story and ask people to continue the story by connecting different photos that they pick. This is good for children. Create a problem from a photo and ask the group to help solve it. Pick a favorite photo. Explain why it is a favorite. Pick the least favorite. Explain why it is not a favorite. Write a dialogue in “balloon” form—as in a comic strip—for the situation in the photo. 1 Interactions is published by Inspiral Productions. You can purchase a copy by writing: Inspiral Productions, 3175 S. Hoover Street, Box 357, Los Angeles, CA 90007–3164.