CHAPTER 4 What Does the Bible Say to the Powerful and the Powerless? I have thus far stated the problem created by cultural differences in power perceptions between whites and people of color. In a multicultural situation, most of the time, white members of the group are perceived to be the powerful ones and people of color the powerless. I am in no way saying people of color are always powerless nor are whites always powerful. I am simply pointing out that wherever there is interaction among whites and people of color, and if members of the group are not aware of this cultural difference, the kind of power dynamic described above exists. This chapter explores what the scriptures say about inequality of power, privilege, and prestige. How does salvation come for the rich and powerful and for the poor, oppressed, and powerless? Is there a difference between how the powerful and the powerless interact with the Gospel? I hope that by exploring these issues, we can begin to do some theological reflection on this intercultural power dynamic and how we, as Christians, can address this issue productively and faithfully. The following biblical quotations provide examples of how Jesus addressed inequality in his time. And [Jesus] lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said: “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are you that hunger now, for you shall be satisfied. Blessed are you that weep now, for you shall laugh…. But woe to you that are rich, for you have received your consolation. Woe to you that are full now, for you shall hunger. Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep. Woe to you, when all speak well of you, for so their fathers did to the false prophets.” Luke 6:20–26, RSV Using folklore, Luke recorded the following parable to deepen the meaning of the passage above using images of the afterlife. “There was a rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen and who feasted sumptuously every day. And at his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus, full of sores, who desired to be fed with what fell from the rich man’s table; moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. The poor man died and was carried by the angels to Abraham’s bosom. The rich man also died and was buried; and in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham far off and Lazarus in his bosom. And he called out, ’Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus to dip the end of his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.’ But Abraham said, ’Son, remember that you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish. And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, in order that those who would pass from here to you may not be able, and no one may cross from there to us.’ And he said, ’Then I beg you, father, to send him to my father’s house, for I have five brothers, so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.’ But Abraham said, ’They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.’ And he said, ’No, father Abraham; but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.’ He said to him, ’If they do not hear Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced if some one should rise from the dead.’” Luke 16:19–30, RSV What can a rich and powerful person do to undo this predicament? The following was what Jesus told a ruler who came to ask him, “What shall I do to inherit eternal life?” (Luke 18:18). Jesus said to him, “One thing you still lack. Sell all that you have and distribute to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.” But when he heard this he became sad, for he was very rich. Luke 18:22–23, RSV Notice the contrast between how the poor and the rich were addressed. Those who had prestige, wealth, and power were cursed. They also had the additional responsibility of giving up and redistributing their wealth and power. But the poor and oppressed did not have to do anything. They were simply blessed. All that was required of them was righteousness, endurance, and faithfulness. Love the L ORD, all you his saints! The L ORD preserves the faithful, but abundantly requites him who acts haughtily. Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all you who wait for the L ORD! Psalm 31:23–24, RSV The scribes and the Pharisees were people with power and prestige in the Jewish community. The following was what Jesus said concerning them: “The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat; so practice and observe whatever they tell you, but not what they do; for they preach, but do not practice. They bind heavy burdens, hard to bear, and lay them on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with their finger. They do all their deeds to be seen by men; for they make their phylacteries broad and their fringes long, and they love the place of honor at feasts and the best seats in the synagogues, and salutations in the market places, and being called rabbi by men. But you are not to be called rabbi, for you have one teacher, and you are all brethren. And call no man your father on earth, for you have one Father, who is in heaven. Neither be called masters, for you have one master, the Christ. He who is greatest among you shall be your servant; whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted. Matthew 23:1–12, RSV Here Jesus went even further in saying that those who serve and humble themselves are the greatest. This was the opposite of what being great and honored meant in most societies. This passage also pointed out that in the community of Christ, there was to be even distribution of power among people. The only one who had more power was God in heaven. Even so, God became human through Jesus Christ, who exemplified greatness in serving and in being powerless on the cross. In the Judeo-Christian tradition, the attitude toward the powerful and rich is very different from the attitude toward the poor and the powerless. The powerful in society are challenged to give up their power and wealth and redistribute it in order to achieve equality among the people of God. To the powerful, the emphasis is on serving and being humble. The powerful are judged by God for their use of their power and privilege. In some places in Scripture, the powerful are actually put down. “…It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God” (Matthew 19:24). The powerless, however, are lifted up, cared for and loved by God because of their faithfulness. To the powerless, the emphasis is on endurance and faithfulness. God has compassion on those who are oppressed and suffering. They are loved by God even though they have no worldly goods and power. They are blessed even though they are suffering now. The powerless are powerful in God’s sight even though they are oppressed now. God will deliver them from all this. “Do not be afraid, stand firm, and see the deliverance that the L ORD will accomplish for you today;…The L ORD will fight for you, and you have only to keep still” (Exodus 14:13–14). This difference in attitude toward the powerful and the powerless was very clear throughout the ministry of Jesus. Jesus never told the poor and powerless to sell all they own and give to the poor. That would obviously be an absurd thing to say. Jesus healed them, loved them, ate with them, touched them, comforted them, blessed them, served them, encouraged them, taught them, and liberated them by his own suffering, death, and resurrection. Finally, Jesus breathed on them to infuse them with the power of the Holy Spirit—the power to teach, heal, and forgive in the name of God. On the other hand, Jesus never told the rich and powerful that they are blessed. Instead, Jesus warned them and challenged them to serve and to humble themselves. He reminded them of what the law and the prophets had said. The Gospel invites the powerful to take up their cross and follow Jesus. Salvation for the powerful comes from the decision to give up power and take up the cross. The Gospel, however, never asks the powerless to choose the cross because the powerless, by their condition of powerlessness, are already on the cross. There is no need for them to choose it, just as there is no need for the poor to give up what they have and give to the poor because they are already poor. Because the powerless are already on the cross, salvation comes from endurance and faithfulness in the hope of God’s deliverance through the resurrection. Choosing the cross and the resurrection of Jesus are part of the same Gospel story. But we interact with the different parts of the story differently depending on our place of power in a particular situation. As a Chinese American working in the Episcopal Church, I often find myself in situations where I am set up to be powerless. For example, I am sometimes invited to be the token Asian in a meeting. When I am in this kind of situation, I actually spend time before I enter the meeting to get in touch with the empty tomb, the resurrection side of the Gospel. I tell myself that I am blessed and a child of God no matter what happens. I ask God to breathe the Holy Spirit through me to give me strength to endure and power to speak and challenge the system I am about to enter. On the other hand, as a trainer and consultant I also find myself in situations where I am given power and authority to influence others. In my preparation for each training session, I spend time reflecting on what it means to choose the cross. I tell myself that I am a servant to the participants. I tell myself that even though I may be treated as an expert, I must be humble. I tell myself that my job is to work myself out of my job by giving my knowledge, skills, and power away freely, so that at the end of the session, the participants will know what I know and my services are no longer needed. It is crucial to determine in a given situation which side of the cross we are on if we are to experience the wholeness of the Gospel. No one can stay on one side of the cross all the time. That would be neglecting the wholeness of the Gospel. Living the Gospel involves moving through the cycle of death and resurrection, the cross and the empty tomb, again and again. The moment I am resurrected into new life of empowerment, I must begin to think about serving and giving away my power and take up the cross again, or I stand the chance of abusing my power. The moment I take up the cross and become powerless, I must begin to think about faithfulness and endurance and look toward empowerment through the empty tomb. It is in this dynamic of death and resurrection, cross and the empty tomb, Lent and Easter, that the Gospel comes to life in each one of us. In the previous chapter, we exposed the injustice created by cultural difference in power perceptions among different cultural groups. In a multicultural encounter, the whites tend to become too powerful and the people of color powerless. Therefore, it is imperative that we understand how our biblical tradition addresses the powerful and the powerless. In this chapter, we discovered that the Gospel commands the powerful to give up power and the powerless to endure and be faithful. Furthermore, the Gospel story empowers the powerless to take up power to do the mighty work of God. In the following chapters, we will further explore how these Gospel imperatives are practiced in our lives.