Appendix C Community Bible Study Preparation: A leader prepares to lead a Community Bible Study by first looking up the upcoming passage in the lectionary. The leader may choose any one of the three lessons. When a passage is chosen, read it a few times. Write down any questions and words that you don’t understand in the passage. Look up the passage in the commentaries 1 and try the best you can to answer the questions of the Research Preparation Form. You should not spend more than forty-five minutes for the research. The goal is not to do a thorough research of the passage, but to get some input from biblical scholarship that will enrich the group’s reflection on the passage. Based on your reading, prepare a three- to five-minute report. Present only the context from which the text is taken, the historical information about the book, and the literary style of the text. Leave the interpretation to the participants. It is very important for the leader to stay within the three- to five-minute time limit. The leader should not give the impression that he or she is an expert. (See p. 130f. for the Research Preparation Form.) Look at the list of questions suggested in Section 4, Step 3. Determine which question you will use for the second-reading reflection. You may want to use a different but more suitable question based on your research. Write the question on newsprint. How to Proceed: I. Opening Meditation and Prayer The leader invites participants to close their eyes and be silent for one minute. Then, the following meditation is read: Take a few deep breaths and exhale slowly. ( Silence ) As you exhale, let go of the tensions and anxieties that you have brought with you so that you can be here fully in this time and space ( Pause ) to be with one another and with God. ( Silence ) Are you willing to let something new happen? ( Silence ) Can you be open to the Spirit of God as it speaks to you through the Bible passage, one another, and in your own hearts? ( Silence ) Then the leader reads the following prayer or some other appropriate prayer. Let us pray: O God, who has taught us that your Word is a lantern to our feet and a light to our path: Grant that as this community devoutly reads the Holy Scriptures, we may realize our fellowship one with another in you, and may learn thereby to know you more fully, to love you more truly, and to follow more faithfully in the steps of your Son Jesus Christ; who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, one God blessed for evermore. Amen. The leader reads the following before proceeding: Before we start, there is an overall ground rule that needs to be stated: If at anytime during this Bible study, you are asked to do something that you don’t want to do, simply say “pass.” We do not want to make anybody feel uncomfortable and no one needs to feel pressured. II. Introduction and Purpose 1. The following preamble is read: The_______ (fill in the name of your organization) Community Bible Study Group is a fellowship of people who come together to read Scripture and to share our insights, experiences, hopes, and prayers as the Bible passages inspire us. We believe, by doing so, we can become a stronger community of people who pray together, help each other with our problems, and reach out to serve others. (If there is no newcomer, the following two paragraphs may be skipped.) We believe that the Bible consists of books written by people, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, to show God at work in nature and history, to set forth the life and teachings of Jesus, and to proclaim the Good News for all people. We must not deny that the writers, inspired by God, wrote these books in the context of their times and culture, sometimes addressing specific communities. Therefore, we invite the participants to explore the meaning of the text in its historical context as well as its application to our lives today. The selection of the text to be studied is one of the passages appointed for the following Sunday according to the common lectionary of the Roman Catholic, Episcopal, Lutheran, Methodist, and Presbyterian Churches. We do this because this will better prepare the participants to hear the Word of God on the coming Sunday and this will stop us from reading only those passages that we are comfortable or familiar with. Moreover, the lectionary is a great symbol of Christian unity today. 2. Invite participants to briefly introduce themselves. IIIA. Ground Rules (Longer Form) 2 (The shorter version of the ground rules, immediately following, may be read if there is no newcomer.) The leader gives the following explanation of having ground rules: In order for a group of people to communicate effectively, it must have a common set of ground rules that everyone in the group agrees to keep. The following are some ground rules that we believe to be very important to keep when we come together to read Scripture: The Bible passage, and not the leader or the group, is the focus of this Bible Study. There is no such thing as “the right” interpretation to each text. The wondrous thing about the Bible is that it has room for many different interpretations. Christians for thousands of years have been interpreting and reinterpreting the same passages and probably will be for thousands of years to follow. We are not here to debate who has the right answer, but we are here to read Scripture together and share our insights. The fact is that no one has the whole truth. Only by sharing our insights and various interpretations can we discover the more “complete” shared truth. Our leaders are not experts. They will not “approve” or “disapprove” of what is shared. They are but facilitators who will lead us through a process by which the inspiration from Scriptures can be shared and celebrated. However, a leader might bring in historical and contextual information concerning the text that will provide the essential background for the group to understand the text better. Some of us will have extensive background in biblical study. Others will have next to none. Nevertheless, we are all equals before the text, for in regard to our own experiences we are all experts. And since it is the intersection of text with experience that evokes insights, no one needs to feel disadvantaged. In fact, we would invite you to adopt a “beginner’s mind,” so that every time we approach a text, we would hear it as if for the first time. Because we seek insights and not just information, it is essential that everyone join in the discussion. Those who tend to speak a lot in groups will need to watch themselves to be sure they are not using more than their share of the time, and those who tend to be timid and shy about speaking out in groups need to take responsibility for carrying their fair share of the load. We invite you to hold the personal information shared here in confidence because only in this way can we feel free to say what is in our minds and hearts. IIIB. Ground Rules (Shorter Version) The Bible passage, and not the leader or the group, is the focus of this Bible Study. We are not here to debate who has the right interpretation, but we are here to read the Scripture together and share our insights. Our leaders are not experts. They are but facilitators who will lead us through a process by which the inspiration from Scriptures can be shared and celebrated. However, a leader might bring in historical, literary, and contextual information to help the group understand the text better. We are all equals before the Scripture; therefore no one needs to feel disadvantaged. We invite you to adopt a “beginner’s mind,” so that every time we approach a text, we would hear it as if for the first time. Because we seek insights and not just information, it is essential that everyone join in the discussion. We invite you to hold the personal information shared here in confidence because only in this way can we feel free to say what is in our minds and hearts. IV. The Bible Study Procedure The leader reads the following explanation of the Bible study procedure: During this Bible study, we will listen to the same Bible passage three times. Each participant will be invited to share his or her insight after each reading. In order to ensure that everyone who wants to share has the opportunity to speak, we will use a process of Mutual Invitation. We will proceed in the following way: The leader or a designated person will share first. After that person has spoken, he or she then invites another to share. Whom you invite next does not need to be the person next to you. After the next person has spoken, that person is given the privilege to invite another to share. If you don’t want to say anything, simply say “pass” and proceed to invite another to share. We will do this until everyone has been invited. Step 1 Invite a member of the group to read the text slowly. Identify which translation of the Bible is being read. As reads this passage, I invite you to watch for a word, phrase, or image that speaks to you. After the reading, there may be a period of silence. Using Mutual Invitation, I now invite you to share a word, phrase, or image in this passage that speaks out to you—without discussion. Step 2 If the leader has some contextual, historical, and literary information about the text or definitions of unfamiliar terms, spend no more than three to five minutes to share it. (See Section on Preparation.) Step 3 Invite another participant to read the passage a second time. As ____ reads this passage again, I invite you to reflect on this question: ( The leader may choose one of the following questions or another suitable question.) a) What was the writer trying to say to the people of his or her time? b) Imagine yourself as one of the characters in the story. ( List all the characters.) How do you feel as this character, as the story is being read? c) Where does this passage touch your life today? d) Where does this biblical story intercept with your life story? e) What does this passage say about ___? (Fill in the blank—a theme or subject from the passage.) f) Draw a picture that represents ____ in the passage. ( Fill in the blank—a theme or subject from the passage.) Time is set aside for reflection (two to three minutes). I now invite you to share your reflection on the question (repeat question again) using Mutual Invitation. Step 4 Invite another participant to read the passage again. As ___ reads the passage the third time, I invite you to reflect on the questions: How does God invite you to change? What does God invite you to do through this passage? The text is read. Time is set aside for reflection. Now I invite you to share your insights on how God invites you to change and what God invites you to do through this passage using Mutual Invitation again. Take a ten-minute break. V. Community Sharing Invite the participants to gather together again. Then read the following: The next half hour is set aside for us to share with each other our concerns and requests for prayers that are inspired by our faith and the study of the Holy Scriptures. (“Concerns” can be replaced by planning, hopes, dreams, visions, struggles, problems, good news, ministries, etc. depending on the spirit of the group.) In order to ensure that everyone has a chance to share, we will continue to use the Mutual Invitation process. If you don’t have anything to share, just say, “pass.” After that, we will open up the floor for anyone who wishes to share more. At the end of the sharing time, the leader uses one of the following ways to close the session: 1. Invite the group to complete the following sentences on a piece of paper: “I thank God today ______.” “I ask God today ______.” Close the session by inviting each participant to read these sentences as prayers. Conclude the session with the Lord’s Prayer. 2. Have a period of silence and invite participants to offer their prayers and petitions. Conclude with the Lord’s Prayer. 3. Invite each participant to ask the person on his or her right to keep her in his prayers in the coming week. This could be very specific or general. When everyone has done that, keep a period of silence and conclude with the Lord’s Prayer. VI. Closing Remarks The following is read to welcome new leaders of future sessions: The leadership of this Community Bible Study group is shared. Anyone in the group who wishes to lead a session is encouraged to talk to the coordinator of the group and he or she will help you with the resources you need in order to prepare for it. If this Bible study proves to be meaningful to you, we invite you to share this with another by inviting your friends to come in the future. Then, the following is read: In closing, I would like to thank all of you for sharing. From the things you’ve heard in this last hour, take what you like and leave the rest. Talk with each other; pray for each other; but let there be no gossip, judgment, or criticism of one another. Instead, let the Word, understanding, love, and peace of God and of this fellowship grow in you day after day in your lives and work until we meet again. COMMUNITY BIBLE STUDY RESEARCH PREPARATION FORM BIBLE PASSAGE: _______________ BIBLICAL CONTEXT: What is the book as a whole about? How does this text relate to the whole? What goes before this text? What goes after this text? What is the function of the passage in its context? (I.e., is it a climax, conclusion, summary, turning point, supporting argument, etc.?) FORM: What is the literary form/genre of the text? Is it a parable, sermon, narrative, saying, song, poem, used in worship, letter, etc.? What does the literary form tell about the text’s meaning and purpose? Would you read the passage differently the second time in order to help the participants to understand the text better? WORD STUDY: What are the key terms in this text? What other words are not readily understandable by the participants? What meaning do they have in this context? TRANSLATION: Compare several translations; how do these inform the task of interpretation? Is there anything that the participants need to know in order to capture the essence of its original Hebrew or Greek text? HISTORICAL CONTEXT: What are the cultural, political, socioeconomic, and theological contexts of the author? Of the audience? Is there a question as to “what really happened”? These questions may not apply to all the passages. Therefore, you may not have answers to all the questions. Review your answers again and write out a three-to-five-minute report. 1 A good one-volume commentary is the Jerome Bible Commentary or the One-Volume Interpreter’s Bible Commentary. Either will give the leader most of the basic information needed about the particular passage. If more information is needed on a particular theme, word, idea, or place, a good source is The Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible. 2 Ground rules one through five are adapted from Walter Wink’s Transforming Bible Study.