CHAPTER 6 Who Has Power and Who Doesn’t? Power Analysis, an Essential Skill for Leadership in a Multicultural Community Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea. The L ORD drove the sea back by a strong east wind all night, and turned the sea into dry land; and the waters were divided. The Israelites went into the sea on dry ground, the waters forming a wall for them on their right and on their left. The Egyptians pursued, and went into the sea after them, all of Pharaoh’s horses, chariots, and chariot drivers. At the morning watch the L ORD in the pillar of fire and cloud looked down upon the Egyptian army, and threw the Egyptian army into panic. He clogged their chariot wheels so that they turned with difficulty. The Egyptians said, “Let us flee from the Israelites, for the L ORD is fighting for them against Egypt.” Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, so that the water may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots and chariot drivers.” So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and at dawn the sea returned to its normal depth. As the Egyptians fled before it, the LORD tossed the Egyptians into the sea. The waters returned and covered the chariots and the chariot drivers, the entire army of Pharaoh that had followed them into the sea; not one of them remained. But the Israelites walked on dry ground through the sea, the waters forming a wall for them on their right and on their left. Exodus 14:21–29 I was in a retreat on scriptural meditation through dance. One of the leaders described the story of Exodus and asked us to identify with being in slavery. Then we were asked to create a dance that would move us from slavery into freedom. I looked around the room and saw that the majority of the group was white American. I voiced my discomfort with this proceeding. As the group discussed this further, I realized I was reacting to the inappropriateness of a group of white Americans identifying with slavery when they were perceived as being powerful by most people of color in the United States. They should be identifying with Pharaoh and his army, I thought. They should be examining their privileges that they have taken for granted. They should be identifying with being soldiers of Pharaoh’s army with their horses and chariots and armors and weapons. They should be getting in touch with what it meant to be affected by the plagues and to be drowned in the Red Sea. The story of Exodus was about God liberating the Israelites who were in slavery. The difference in power and strength between the Israelites and Pharaoh’s army was apparent: the Israelites walked on foot and Pharaoh’s army had chariots and horses. For the powerless Israelites, God was on their side. They were blessed and God would deliver them as long as they remained faithful to God. Out of this blessedness they were able to walk across the Red Sea on dry land. They were able to live through the ordeal of the wilderness and had strength to enter Canaan, the promised land. Our retreat leader’s request of white Americans to identify themselves exclusively with slavery was disturbing to me because it is dangerous for the powerful to identify themselves as the powerless victims. For example, the early European-American settlers suffered religious persecution in Europe. It was very understandable for them to think of America as the promised land. However, when they met the American Indians in an intercultural encounter, they were perceived as powerful people. In this situation, there was a powerful group who believed they were victims. They mistakenly believed that they had the right to claim the land as their promised land. The result was the genocide of the American Indians. This was a case of how dangerous it is for the powerful to take on the spirituality of the oppressed and the powerless. If they had realized at that point that they were perceived as powerful, then they might have identified with the powerful Pharaoh instead of the oppressed Israelites. If that had happened, the history of North America might be different. Pharaoh and the Israelites are parts of the Exodus story. The miracle of the tongue and the ear are interrelated parts of the Pentecost story. Choosing the cross and the resurrection are parts of the same salvation story of the Gospel. Depending on the cultural contexts of the readers and the context of the multicultural situation, the same scriptural story may challenge, support, affirm, motivate, or even put down different people. In other words, if scriptural study is shared among people from different cultures, people from one cultural context will be able to hear how people from a different cultural context interact with the same scriptural story. Imagine a group having a conversation around the Exodus story in which the powerful identify with Pharaoh and the powerless identify with the Israelites. Reflection on the story will be richer as a result. Different points of view are explored. Perhaps reconciliation may begin to happen between the powerful and the powerless. In this sense, scriptural study in a multicultural community can help us see a more complete scriptural story. Church leaders today have to understand how the Gospel speaks to the powerless and the powerful differently. They must learn when to teach them appropriately according to their application to different cultural groups. Preaching in a bilingual liturgy becomes more and more difficult as I grow in my understanding of cultural differences. The old way of translating a sermon from one language to another just does not work anymore. Maybe it never worked. When I prepared a sermon in English, I found after translating it into Chinese that the sermon became too personal and individualistic, sometimes too psychological and not action-oriented. If I prepared a sermon in Chinese first, the translation into English became too repetitive, sometimes too community-centered, and perhaps uninteresting to the English-speaking listeners. After much reflection, I realized that the thought patterns and logic I used when I was preparing an English and a Chinese sermon were very different. Not only that, the content of the sermon changed because of the audience I had in mind. I found the theme I was preaching in Chinese was leaning toward liberation. It was about taking on power and action to change the injustices of our society. The theme I was preaching in English revolved around repentance, forgiveness and giving. Now when I am asked about preaching in a bilingual liturgy, I encourage people to preach two different sermons. Teaching a white group to bear the cross is totally appropriate in a multicultural setting. In fact, Western Christianity has emphasized this aspect of the Gospel for centuries. Most English-speaking white congregations have a very extensive Lenten program but very little Easter celebration. The white American liturgical churches seem to be obsessed with Lent. Lent is the time all the special programs begin. Lent is a time for special retreats, lectures, prayer groups, and Bible studies. The first Sunday after Easter is called low Sunday because the attendance is usually the lowest. When I asked a group of fellow Christians one time to celebrate the Good News of the risen Christ the day after Easter, the reply was, “Not today, I am too tired.” However, teaching people of color about bearing the cross first is not appropriate. That is like teaching poor persons that they have to sell all their possessions and give them to the poor. You do not have to choose the cross when you are already on the cross. Instead, we should be teaching blessedness, the empty tomb, the resurrection, and Easter celebration. In the Chinese Christian church, very little attention is given to Lent. In fact, most of the time, Lent begins around the time of the Chinese New Year celebration, which is our most joyous festival. We seem to skip Lent altogether and go straight to Easter. One of my earliest childhood memories was going to church on Easter Sunday. I loved the joyful hymns, the flowers, and the brightness of the event. In the community of my childhood, which consisted of mostly poor Chinese in Hong Kong, the emphasis was on the resurrection and not on suffering, because there was so much suffering in the community already. Liberation theology, which has its primary development in Latin America and Africa, emphasizes God’s favor for the oppressed and God’s plan to liberate them. Liberation theology emerges out of the kind of spirituality that emphasizes the empty tomb, the resurrection, and blessedness. It is equally dangerous to teach people of color the theology of the cross. Many white missionaries, whose spirituality is grounded in the cross, naturally want to preach and share it in their evangelizing work. However, preaching salvation that came from choosing the cross to a group of already powerless people reinforces their perception of their powerlessness. As a result, some powerless groups actually believe that suffering is good for them and that suffering is part of their salvation. Power analysis becomes critical if we are to live out the fullness of the Gospel. We must ask the questions: In this social, economic, and political context, who has power and who does not? Who is perceived to be powerful and who is perceived to be powerless? In a multicultural world, we might find ourselves shifting back and forth between being powerful and powerless depending on the contexts in which we relate to others. In any given situation, we must determine where we stand in relation to others in the power continuum. This determination will govern which spirituality and theology we ought to practice and teach. If I find myself in a powerless position in relation to others, I must practice the spirituality of the empty tomb. If I find myself in a powerful place, I must practice the spirituality of the cross. To help people understand the importance of power analysis in multicultural groups, I have used a process of group division that I learned from working with the National Conference of Christians and Jews. In a typical process, I first divide the group by color—a group of whites and a group of people of color. Both groups are asked to discuss their experiences in an intercultural encounter. When the groups return, they report their findings. One question keeps surfacing in these discussions: Which group is perceived to have power? In this division, the groups agree that the white group is perceived to have more power. Then, I divide the group again by gender. They are asked to discuss their experience in inter-gender encounters. When they report back, one of the observations is that the men are perceived as powerful, and the women as powerless. In the group divisions, the power position of white men and women of color stays the same. White men are perceived as powerful while women of color are perceived as powerless in both groupings. The emphases of their spirituality are more consistent. White men will need to practice the spirituality of the cross most of the time in a multicultural situation. However, white men do not have to choose the cross all the time. If we divide the group once again by income—a rich group and a poor group—there will be white men on both the powerful and powerless sides. But in most cases, I have found that the color division tends to be the dominant force in determining people’s perceptions of their power. For women of color, liberation is the word. Most of the time, they need to practice the spirituality of the empty tomb and the resurrection in a multicultural situation. I believe very strongly that women of color need to spend time together in order to build the self-esteem and power base to challenge the system that treats them as powerless people most of the time. White women and men of color experienced a shift in power perception in this group division process. White women are considered powerful in the first grouping because they are white in the first grouping. But as women, they are considered powerless in the second grouping. The men of color are considered powerless because they are people of color in the first grouping. In the second grouping, they are considered powerful as men. The point I want to make is that in a multicultural environment we need to be sensitive to where we are in the continuum of power perception, especially white women and men of color. Depending on the context, these two groups may be perceived as either powerful or powerless. Therefore, they need to learn to shift between practicing the spirituality of the cross and the empty tomb. To many people, this sounds very inconsistent. Many bicultural church leaders, who can function in more than one cultural group, often are accused of being inconsistent—two-faced. Consistency seems to be one of white America’s highest values. If you are not consistent in your belief, you are called “wishy-washy.” Politicians running for office are being scrutinized especially for their consistency in stands on issues. They lose credibility if they are discovered to be inconsistent. Therefore, they cannot be trusted. This value of consistency can easily be transferred to our understanding of our power. If this value is not challenged, in an intercultural encounter, the group that has to shift in its power perception will not be able to adapt and conflict will most certainly arise. For example, I was in a conference where the participants were finally at a point where they were ready for a more in-depth discussion of cultural differences. In the course of the discussion, an African American found enough courage to tell the group what it was like growing up as a person of color. Before this person finished, a white woman said that the African American’s experience was no different from her own experience as a woman. Then she continued with a litany of her own experience of how she was oppressed by men all her life. The more the people of color tried to explain that there were differences, the more the white participants disagreed. They said: “What you experienced was part of what all human beings have to get through growing up, black, white, Asian, Hispanic, women, etc.” This went back and forth for a few rounds and eventually the people of color got totally frustrated and retreated to silence. Here was an example of what might happen if people do not realize their power perception has changed due to the context. The white woman was right in saying that she was oppressed and powerless when compared with men. However, what she did not realize was that in the multicultural context as a white person, she is perceived as powerful. Here, consistency of her perception of her power needs to be challenged. Seminary education for many men of color has the same effect. For example, a community of color raised up a male leader to consider the ordained ministry. In most communities of color, the leaders were greatly respected and given a lot of power. This man was probably given much authority and many leadership opportunities before he reached this point. The church sent him to seminary where, with a few exceptions, he was taught in a white middle-class, English-speaking context. In this context, he felt powerless and naturally focused his work on the spirituality of empowerment. Of course, seminary also reinforced the value of consistency. After seminary, he returned to his community to serve. But the community found him to be too powerful and insensitive. Here was an already powerful person in his own community being educated to claim even more power. No wonder he was not accepted by his own community. In addition to teaching the spirituality of empowerment in a white environment, seminary education also should have nurtured this person, who was perceived by his own community as powerful, to focus his work and spirituality on humility, servanthood, and giving power to others. Because of the shift in power perception for men of color, they need to be very careful as they move in and out of different cultural contexts. “For everything there is a season and a time for every matter under heaven.” Pharaoh and his army, Moses, and the Israelites are parts of the same Exodus story. Jesus’ death on the cross and resurrection are parts of the same salvation story. Lent and Easter are seasons of the same church year. But each story begins with powerful and powerless roles. As each story is being told through the words of the Judeo-Christian storytellers, the politically powerful ones become spiritually powerless and the politically powerless ones become spiritually powerful. “…many who are first will be last, and the last will be first” (Matt. 19:30). The movement from being powerful to powerless and then from powerless to powerful is the dynamic of the Gospel. We need to know, in a given context, where our starting point is. If we find ourselves perceived as powerful, we must take on the spirituality of the cross and move toward being powerless. If we find ourselves perceived as powerless, we must take on the spirituality of resurrection and move toward being powerful. In a multicultural society, this dynamic becomes more complicated because we can shift from being powerful in one moment to being powerless in the next and vice versa. A leader in a multicultural community must learn to do power analysis on a given situation. Based on this analysis, the leader will determine his or her style of leadership, theological emphasis, and spirituality.