CHAPTER 5 A Fresh Look at Pentecost as the Beginning of a Multicultural Church Community When the day of Pentecost had come, they were all together in one place. And suddenly a sound came from heaven like the rush of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared to them tongues as of fire, distributed and resting on each one of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven. And at this sound the multitude came together, and they were bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in his own language. And they were amazed and wondered, saying, “Are not all these who are speaking Galileans? And how is it that we hear, each of us in his own native language? Parthians and Medes and Elamites and residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya belonging to Cyrene, and visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabians, we hear them telling in our own tongues the mighty works of God.” Acts 2:1–11, RSV P entecost, which marked the beginning of the church, provided the ideal image of how people from different cultural backgrounds should be able to live together. With the power of the Holy Spirit, they could understand each other in this miracle of communication. The church ever since Pentecost has strived for this ideal but never quite accomplished it. I had read and heard the Pentecost story interpreted to me many times ever since I was a child—first in Roman Catholic primary school in Hong Kong, then in the Episcopal Church in New York’s Chinatown, and then in college campus ministry. The Pentecost story was always explained to me as the miracle of the tongues—that is, the Holy Spirit gave the disciples the power to speak in different languages in order to communicate the “mighty works of God.” As the youngest child in a Chinese family, I certainly did not believe I had that gift. As a teenager in the United States, trying desperately to learn English, I was certain that I did not have the gift of tongues. Even in seminary, I had not heard the Pentecost miracle interpreted as anything other than that of a miracle of the tongue. Then I went to a Bible study training conference conducted by Walter Wink and June Keener-Wink. The first question that Walter asked after reading this passage was: Is this a miracle of the tongue or is this a miracle of the ear? This simple question cracked open our ethnocentric interpretation of the Bible passage. For the first time, I was able to read and hear verses 6 and 7. The multitude knew that the disciples were speaking Galilean and yet they could understand them in their own languages. To understand the Pentecost event as exclusively a miracle of the tongue is only perceiving half of what was happening. The miracle of the tongue is more action-oriented. It involves putting out words in other tongues. It involves giving information. The miracle of the ear is more “passive.” It involves listening and receiving information. Using Pentecost as an ideal, the church in the West took the active, miracle-of-the-tongue approach. The pattern was that if you were to spread the Gospel, you must first learn to speak the language of the people with whom you were trying to communicate and then you preach to them about the “mighty works of God.” This was the traditional missionary approach. History has shown us the negative results of this miracle-of-the-tongue approach. In the recent years, missionary became a bad word for my denomination. The Episcopal Church, in dealing with its guilt, has taken an indifferent attitude toward missions. While we do not want to be too pushy, we fall short of realizing the miracle of the ear. Instead of training whites to speak a different language, the church has raised up indigenous leaders from the various cultures to evangelize. As a result, most of the multicultural churches in the United States consisted of monolingual and most likely monocultural congregations sharing the same facility with little or no real communication or interaction among the various groups. In some situations, power struggles among the groups took shape in such questions as: “Who owns the church?” “Who are members of the church?” “Does each congregation give enough money to maintain the church?” This to me is going back to the Tower of Babel. Another approach that also falls short of the miracle of the ear is the ethnocentric way of doing justice that is based on the naive belief that by putting two culturally very different groups together, the Holy Spirit will make Pentecost happen. This has usually happened when there is a declining white congregation in the midst of a changing neighborhood where a growing non-English-speaking congregation is using a rented facility to worship. The church authority thinks this is a perfect opportunity to enable Pentecost to happen by combining the two congregations. Financially, this would save the white congregation from having to close the church. At the same time, the growing “ethnic” congregation could have a real home. These situations usually look great on paper. The two groups literally are thrown into the situation without any intercultural sensitivity training. As a result, most of these congregations revert back to multi-congregational structure in which the different groups maintain their own worship, governance, and leadership. Even though they are all under one name and one roof, they tend to have very little interaction with each other, and when they do, there are conflicts and power struggles among them. To realize Pentecost in our time, we must understand this miracle in its fullness. Doing a power analysis in the Pentecost situation is crucial to understanding this miracle. Power analysis, as I use it here, is nothing more than looking at who has the power and who is powerless in the social, political, and economic context of the event. Knowing this information will shed light on many situations, not only in what is recorded in the Holy Scriptures but also in our time. The disciples, who believed Jesus was the Messiah, were part of a very small minority among the Jews. They believed Jesus’ death and resurrection signified that he was the one sent by God to bring salvation to all. To the Romans, they were just another sect of Judaism whose leader had been executed. Considering these preceding events, the disciples and Jesus’ other followers should be in hiding, in fear of further persecution. Instead, in their seemingly powerless state, they were given the power to speak in tongues and later to preach in authority in public places. The miracle of the tongue was the Holy Spirit’s inspiration to the powerless to see that they were blessed in their weakness. In that blessedness they found strength to speak out and proclaim the mighty works of God. The miracle of the tongue was for the powerless. On the other hand, in the Pentecost event, the “devout Jews from every nation who dwell in Jerusalem” were the powerful ones in this context. They were the ones who demanded that Pilate crucify Jesus instead of the “notorious prisoner” Barabbas. They were the majority who did not believe that Jesus was the Messiah. If they wanted, they could have handed the disciples over to the officials to be persecuted. Indeed, they were the powerful ones in this situation. Yet, they were given the miracle of the ear. They were given the gift of listening and understanding even though what was said by the disciples was in another language. They were in the receiving mode. Some still did not understand but thought they were drunk. But others were amazed. The miracle of the ear for the powerful, working together with the miracle of the tongue for the powerless, was essential to make the Pentecost experience complete. If the church is to move toward Pentecost in the midst of a multicultural society, it must work in cooperation with the Holy Spirit to make the miracle of the tongue and the miracle of the ear happen according to the perception and reality of the power dynamics among different cultural groups in the community. This implies a bridge-building strategy that requires two different approaches from the different cultural banks. On one end, the church needs to teach the white middle and upper class to listen. The church needs to encourage those who are perceived as powerful to practice the spirituality of choosing the cross. The instinct for the powerful is to act, control, and command. The church should challenge the powerful to go against that instinct. The church should invite them to get out of the “doing” mode and enter into a “being” mode of listening. The Gospel challenges them to give up and redistribute their power to the powerless. On the other end, the church needs to encourage people of color to gather in communities of their choosing. In these communities of faith, they are encouraged to find their identity and strength just as the powerless disciples gathered together before the Pentecost event. Then, the church needs to give them a platform to address the whole church. If the church is to respond to the yearning of the Holy Spirit, it should move toward supporting the communities of people of color to come forth and exercise the miracle of the tongue and speak of the mighty works of God. Remember that the powerless and the weak are blessed. It is through their faith together that they find power to endure and to speak the truth. It is essential that the two approaches be taken together so that those in power and the powerless can meet in the middle where they can interact on equal ground. If the communities of color are ready to proclaim the mighty works of God, but the white members of the church are not listening but are in a doing and talking mode, nothing will change, at best. At worst, the people of color will be challenged and put down. They may get so frustrated that they will not accept another invitation to speak in a multicultural situation. The feelings may be, “Why bother! They will never listen anyway.” Many of the racism workshops that I have observed in seminaries, churches, and dioceses fall under this kind of incomplete approach to multicultural encounters. On the other hand, if whites are ready to listen but people of color are not given the time and space to build the communities of strength together, there will be nothing to which to listen. The people of color will then be blamed for not being prepared even though they were given the chance to be equal to the others. Tokenism, with all its good intention to include “minorities,” is an example of this approach. Both groups need to do their homework before a true inter-cultural encounter can occur. Most of the time, the church makes a move before either of the communities involved is ready. As a result, the tremendous effort and excitement to realize Pentecost has been in vain. In order for an intercultural encounter to be truly “pentecostal,” the church must first value monocultural gatherings. For people of color, a monocultural gathering serves as a time to be in community, to gain self-esteem in the context of the collective, and to gain strength before moving into a world that does not value who they are. It is a time to learn that they are blessed, that in their endurance they are resurrected into the new life of empowerment. It is a time to heal, a time to gather and build up strength, a time to embrace, and a time to speak. For whites, a monocultural gathering is a time to clarify and understand what it means to be whites in this society. It serves as a time for reflection on how they have taken their power and privilege for granted. It is a time to refrain from doing and trying to “fix” the problem but a time to listen and keep silence. It is a time for repentance, a time to accept the burden of the cross, a time to break down denials, and a time to cast away stones that built and supported the foundations of the racist system. There is a lot of resistance to this kind of movement because on the surface it looks like segregation again. However, if we know the purposes of these gatherings, we will not allow permanent segregation to happen. Only after the powerful and the powerless have done their homework can they come together in a true “pentecostal” encounter. “For everything there is a season, and a time for every matter under heaven,” said the writer of Ecclesiastes (3:1). That is true. The question is, when is the right time for whom to do what? This discernment is crucial and can be accomplished only by doing power analysis on ourselves as we relate to others based on the social, political, and economic context of the situation.