CHAPTER 8 Living Out the Fullness of the Gospel in the Peaceable Realm A ll through the year after the event described in the previous chapter, I heard many accounts that it had been a life-changing experience. A year later, I revisited the same conference. Many of the planners were participants in the previous conference. One of the Asian American planning committee members who was not at the event a year ago commented to me: “This is the most sensitive group of white people I have ever met.” Apparently they were using what they had learned. Again, they gave a lot of attention to including people of color for this event. As a result, there was a very good representation of American Indians and Asian Americans. During the conference, they decided to use the group division technique again. The participants were divided into three groups: whites, American Indians, and Asian Americans. The task was for each group to work for a period of time, and when they returned, they would share something about their cultures and histories with the whole group. The Asian Americans gave a report covering some history of each of the Asian groups represented. They mentioned the Japanese internment during World War II, the Chinese Exclusion Act, etc. They also covered many positive aspects of their cultures, such as the support of the extended family structure and their emphasis on education. The American Indians were much younger. They gave personal accounts of some of the native rituals in which they participated while they were growing up. It evolved into a question-and-answer session where the whites and the Asian Americans asked the questions and the American Indians answered. We all learned a lot. In stark contrast, the white group’s report consisted of one big “I am sorry!” They gave a litany of how whites oppressed all the different groups beginning with the American Indians, then the African Americans, and then the Asians and the Hispanics. At the end of their report, they were depressed, and the Asian Americans and American Indians looked at each other with a look that appeared to say, “What are we supposed to do with that?” Later that day, there was an opportunity for the previous year’s participants to share their experiences. A few people of color actually believed that they had become the oppressors when they claimed their power by asking the whites to be silent and listen. The white group’s report earlier in the conference confirmed their uneasy feeling of being the oppressors. At that point, I realized that last year’s experience was only the beginning for this group of young people. There needed to be a continuation of the process. The powerful cannot stay powerful, and the powerless cannot stay powerless. There needs to be movement between the two in order for the Gospel to come alive for each group. This movement has to be cyclical. The white group entered into the Gospel cycle through the cross, by giving up power in the event a year earlier. However, they did not make any movement from there. They stayed powerless. The guilt that came with recognizing their privileges and their ancestors’ misuse of their power was so strong that they had become paralyzed. They were not able to distinguish between sharing power and being persecuted. So for the powerful, once they have given up their power, they must continue the cycle to move from death to resurrection. Death without resurrection is a total loss. The cross without the empty tomb is nothing but a symbol of death. The entry point for the people of color in this situation was through the empowerment of the resurrection. But they could not stay there because they might become too powerful and stand at risk of becoming the oppressors. I did not think in this case that they had become the oppressors. However, since the white group remained powerless a year later, it looked as though they had become the oppressors. In any case, they needed to continue the cycle and learn to share the power that they had just gained. Many reactions to strong ethnic groups and women’s groups in the name of “reverse” racism or sexism may be caused by this fear that the powerless will become too powerful. But I believe there needs to be a lot more empowerment of people of color before this fear is justified. If every group that comes into power begins to explore the spirituality of the cross, then the fear of the oppressed becoming the oppressor will be eliminated. The cycle of the cross and the empty tomb must continue. If not, we will be abusing our power. Figure 8.1 represents the cycle of Gospel living in a multicultural community. Notice that the entry point for whites and people of color are different. Whites enter the cycle by giving up power and bearing the cross. People of color enter the cycle by endurance, faithfulness, empowerment, and resurrection. Once both groups have entered the cycle, they must continue to move around the cycle or they will risk abusing their power and becoming paralyzed by guilt. Figure 8.1 Cycle of Gospel Living Every Christian is called to live out the cycle of the cross and resurrection, Lent and Easter. In a multicultural society, living out this cycle becomes even more crucial. Leaders are often called to be “Robin Hoods” of power—to take power from the powerful and give it to the powerless. For example, I was a music minister for a conference in which the majority were whites. One of my goals was to present music that was inclusive of the ethnic cultures in the church. After an African-American hymn was introduced, a group of whites complained that the language in the hymn was sexist and demanded that the male references to God (i.e., Lord) be changed. The African Americans did not want to make the change and were on the verge of calling the request racist. The white group was close to calling the African Americans sexists. I did a power analysis of the situation based on the cultural contexts of the group involved. From the context of the African-American history and culture, I drew the conclusion that the predominant use of “Lord” to refer to God was very important to the African American. Because of their experience of slavery, they responded to the God of the Hebrew scripture—an all-powerful Lord who would deliver them from the hardship of slavery. The need to see God as strong and powerful was crucial to the survival of the African Americans. I also evaluated the situation from the context of the white liberal American culture. In this context, a cultural assumption was that all people were equal. With the help of the feminist movement, there was the need to see men and women as equal. Furthermore, since humankind, both male and female, is made in the image of God, to continue to image God in exclusively male terms is unacceptable. Therefore, there was the need to change all male references to God to more gender-neutral terms. I then analyzed the context of this encounter and realized the African Americans were the minority and were perceived by others as powerless. The white group, even though their concern was valid in their own cultural context, were perceived as powerful. Based on this analysis, I decided to continue singing the African American hymns without any changes because, in this situation, it might be more important to support the African Americans. However, I tried to counterbalance this decision by intentionally introducing new hymns with feminine images of God to the whole group. I wanted to affirm the importance of inclusive language but not at the expense of taking power away from a group that was already perceived as powerless. We can see the complexity of doing justice in a multicultural community. I practice this cycle of Gospel living myself as I exist between two cultures. When I am in a church meeting with a white majority, I become very outspoken sometimes, speaking on behalf of the powerless. When I am with a Chinese community, I know I am respected and given power because of my ordained status. I use my power very carefully. I become very humble and try to find ways to empower others in that community. When I worked in a small Chinese ministry that worshiped in the cathedral of the diocese, I walked through this cycle within the same day, sometimes several times. For example, I would have a meeting with the diocesan committee representing the Chinese ministry—a time to know I was blessed and resurrected and empowered by the Holy Spirit to challenge the system. In the afternoon, I would visit a Chinese church member—a time to serve, be humble, and empower others by taking up the cross. Then, I would have a meeting with the bishop—time to be resurrected again. That evening, I would have a Chinese Bible study group—time to take up the cross again. There is much fear associated with giving power away. People feel that once they do, they will be powerless forever. But that fear is based on the assumption that people in general like to keep the power that they have. This assumption, which may be true in the world today, is a source of evil. In our fear of becoming powerless, we hold on to whatever power and material goods that we have. As long as we give in to this fear, we are supporting the evil system where there is no justice—no even distribution of power. Jesus combats evil by facing the fear of powerlessness. Jesus lets go of power, dies on the cross, and triumphs over evil. Much of the Gospel teaches us to give power away and not be afraid of becoming powerless, because in our powerless-ness we will become powerful in combating the evil of the world. Imagine a world where all who have power give their power away to those who have less. Those who give their power away to those who have less will become powerless initially. But this does not happen just once. If everyone has the same value, then the people who received power earlier and therefore have become more powerful, will give their power back to those who have become powerless. So the more we give away, the more we receive. Try the following exercise. Say you have ten people in the room. Give two people ten chips each. The instruction is that when you have more chips than others, you give them away until you have none. This could be a lot of fun. You realize after a while that the exercise becomes an endless sequence of giving and receiving. No one is ever left without any chip even though you are instructed to give them all away. The more times you give yours away, the more times you will receive. This is the dynamic of living the Gospel. This is what the Peaceable Realm is about. This is what the Kingdom of God is like. If everyone learned to give power away, the Kingdom of God would be here. “Your Kingdom come…” in the Lord’s Prayer would be realized. The question then is, “How do you give your power away?” This is one of those things that is more easily said than done. Giving power away is scary. There is the fear of chaos, being out of control, and even being hurt. It takes a very secure person to do that. In the next chapter, I will introduce a process called “Mutual Invitation,” which exemplifies how to give power away. The more we practice giving, the more we will be comfortable with it. It becomes like a process of breathing in and out. We cannot breathe out all the time or we suffocate. On the other hand, we cannot breathe in all the time or we hyperventilate. This rhythm of breathing in and out, giving and receiving, becoming powerful and powerless, is the rhythm of living the Gospel fully.