Appendix A Mutual Invitation Objectives: To facilitate sharing and discussion in a multicultural group. Type of Group: Any. Size of Group: 4–15. Setting: Participants should sit in a circle. Materials: Newsprint and markers. Time Required: Depending on the size of the group. A good way to tell how much time will be required for each round of sharing is to multiply the number of participants by five minutes. How to Proceed: Let participants know how much time is set aside for this process. Introduce the topic to be discussed or information to be gathered or question(s) to be answered. Write this on news print and put it up on a wall so everyone can see it. Introduce the process by reading the following: In order to ensure that everyone who wants to share has the opportunity to speak, we will proceed in the following way: The leader or a designated person will share first. After that person has spoken, he or she then invites another to share. Whom you invite does not need to be the person next to you. After the next person has spoken, that person is given the privilege to invite another to share. If you don’t want to say anything, simply say “pass” and proceed to invite another to share. We will do this until everyone has been invited. If this is the first time you use this with the group, it will be very awkward at first. The tendency is to give up on the process and go back to the whoever-wants-to-talk-can-talk way. If you are persistent in using this process every time you facilitate the gathering, the group will eventually get used to it and will have great fun with it. A good way to ensure the process goes well the first time is to make sure there are a couple of people in the group who have done this before and, as you begin the process, invite them first. Problems to Anticipate: This process addresses differences in the perception of personal power among the participants. Some people will be eager for their turn, while others will be reluctant to speak when they are invited. If a person speaks very briefly and then does not remember to invite the next person, do not invite for him or her. Simply point out that this person has the privilege to invite the next person to speak. This is especially important if a person “passes.” By ensuring that this person still has the privilege to invite, you affirm and value that person independent of that person’s verbal ability.