CHAPTER 7 The Wolves Lie Down with the Lambs A Case Study I n this chapter, we will look at a case study in which a multicultural group succeeded temporarily to live out the spirituality of choosing the cross for the white members of the group and the spirituality of resurrection for the people of color. I was a resource person for a young adult conference. The conference planners were very intentional about recruiting participants for this conference so that there would be representatives from the various ethnic groups in the region. As a result of their effort, one third of the participants were people of color—Japanese American, American Indian, African American, El Salvadorian American, native Hawaiian, and Chinese American—and the other two-thirds were European Americans. What happened during the first two days of the conference was repeated episodes of the typical pattern described in Chapter Three. The white members of the group did all the talking and the people of color rarely participated verbally. It was apparent that they were very uncomfortable. The silence was loaded with anxiety. The conference leaders tried every trick in group processing but could not get the people of color to participate verbally. The more sensitive members of the white group tried to reach out to the people of color. The effort to communicate with them one-on-one was helpful, but whenever there were more than three people in the group, they could not seem to participate. Most of the time the whole group, about thirty people, worked and had discussion together. For Bible study and small-group sharing, the participants were divided into groups of six. Since there were only about ten persons of color, the planner followed the usual strategy of putting one or two persons of color in each group. By the morning of the third day, two persons of color did not show up. When others went to look for them, they discovered that they were not feeling well and decided to stay in their rooms. In Bible study group that morning, two persons in two different groups broke down and cried after being pressured by others to speak. One of them actually said that she felt so useless in the group that she might as well not have come. I was invited to this conference especially to do a workshop on “Multicultural Decision Making” on the afternoon of the third day. With the help of a friend, Ida Johnson, a black American from the West Indies, we designed the following process. We divided the participants into two groups: a white group and a people of color group. They were put in separate rooms and were given identical tasks: to evaluate the last two days and come back with a recommendation on the agenda for the last day of the conference. In the white group, the first reaction was guilt. “Why are we talking about them without their being here?” “We should be including them here.” After much discussion, someone finally said, “Look, we’ve tried everything. Nothing is working. Why don’t we shut up and listen to them? Maybe that will help.” Someone else began to propose a plan of how they could invite the other group to share and they would listen. Then they realized that they were doing “it” again—being the ones in control. So they decided to abandon all plans and simply went back with the agenda to listen and “to let” the other group go first. In the people of color group, of which I was a part, I decided to take a more directive leadership style. At first, I asked them how they were doing. Their responses were standard polite ones: “I am learning a lot,” “I am making many new friends,” and “The people here are very nice.” When I pushed further by stating the fact that they were not participating in the last two days and asked them what could be the cause of it, they began to open up. These were samples of what was shared. “I grew up in a traditional Hawaiian home; children were to be seen and not heard.” “As a woman, I was taught not be speak unless I was talked to first.” “After a while, I decided that if they had so much to say, why don’t I just let them talk?” “This is the first time I have been in a conference like this. I came expecting to listen and learn more about the Episcopal Church. I didn’t expect to be asked to talk. If I knew enough to talk about it in the group, I wouldn’t need to come to the conference in the first place.” “Everyone seems to be so smart here. I feel so bad that I could not say anything.” After more than an hour of sharing, the group decided that what they just shared was very important for the other group to hear. But they were unsure of sharing these feelings in front of the whole group. After more discussion, we decided that we would ask to go first and we would invite three of them who had been quiet in the last two days to join us in a circle in the middle of the room. Then we would invite the rest of the participants to turn around and face the wall and listen. This way, the inner circle could be free to share without a lot of people staring at them. When we returned with everyone in same room again, I decided not to direct which group should report first. There was again a pregnant silence. The people-of-color group had elected a spokesperson, and I knew that she was trying to find enough courage to speak first. But the white group beat us to it. A white spokesperson said, “We have decided to let you go first.” The people-of-color spokesperson said, “We were going to ask to go first.” There was immediate relief with much laughter. The people-of-color spokesperson began by asking two questions. “Are you willing to listen to our stories?” A resounding “Yes” was the response. “Are you willing to take the responsibility of taking these stories home with you?” Again, the answer was yes. The people-of-color group picked three whites who had been fairly quiet through the last two days and invited them to sit with them in a small circle in the middle of the room. The rest of the white group was asked to turn around, face the wall, and just listen in silence. The group in the middle reenacted what happened in their small-group discussion. They shared how they felt frustrated and powerless, and they talked about why they felt that way. There were many tears and emotions shared. At the end of the sharing, almost everyone was crying, including the people who faced the wall in silence all that time. After some reflection on the experience in the large group, the whole group agreed on a new way of being together for the rest of the conference. The agreement was that for every white person who spoke, a person of color was invited to speak and vice versa. This was how it actually worked out. A white person would speak, usually at length. Then there was a silence. The quality of the silence was different this time because everyone knew that the silence was a time for thinking and courage building and mutual support. Most importantly, the silence was an invitation to a member of the people-of-color group to share. After a period, a person of color would speak, usually briefly. Immediately, a white participant would jump in. Then there was a period of silence again. Then another person of color would share briefly. Then a white person would jump in right away. I described what followed as a dance. There was a definite choreography that the group had agreed upon. Yet, there was spontaneity in the sharing. For the first time, everyone in the group was participating and sharing. The wolf and the lamb finally could dwell together peacefully. The turning point of the situation was the physical separation of the two groups—one was perceived as powerful and the other powerless. The physical separation was merely a visual indication of the psychological and social barriers that were already there. In the process of dealing with this uncomfortable separation, the white group recognized their position of power even though they had not meant it to be that way. Their good intentions to include seemed to have the opposite effect. They realized that there was something else at work that was beyond their control. With this knowledge, they chose to take the position of the powerless—of not being in control—by asking the people of color to share first and then remain silent and listen. To be silent, to let go of control, to be passive and just “be,” were not “natural” according to the white cultural values. They were taught that it was good to take charge, it was good to speak up as an individual, and it was good to be active and “do something” to correct the problem. Their choice to give up power was going against their instinct. It had to be very uncomfortable and limiting for them. Yet, that was what was required of them in order truly to accomplish what they had set out to do—to be inclusive, to treat everyone as an equal, independent of his or her culture, class, and race. There was a shift in the understanding of equality. Equality was not sameness of behavior and values. They had learned that they could not expect the other to behave the same way as they behave. Instead, equality came only after they had recognized the inequality of power and that it was through giving up of power that equality could occur. For the people of color, the separation from the white group brought relief. For the first time, they could share what they were feeling with others who had similar experiences. In sharing their powerlessness, they found community. Through connecting with others in community, they found strength and self-esteem. They recognized that they were not alone and they were not stupid. They were just different. In this common strength, they realized that they were equal to the white group. As a collective, they too could take control of the situation. When they returned to the large group, the spokesperson spoke with power on behalf of the group. Power for most people of color comes from the collective and not the individual. The experience of the white group in this conference was a living example of a group realizing their domination just by being who they were and deciding to take a powerless position. In this case, they literally faced the wall in order to be equal to the people of color. For the people of color, by being in a group of seemingly powerless people, they found power and self-esteem in their collectiveness and returned to meet the other on equal ground. The resolution to speak alternately was an example of creating an environment in which everyone is interacting on equal ground. “If [anyone] would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. For whoever would save his life will lose it; and whoever loses his life for my sake and the gospel’s will save it.” Mark 8:34–35, RSV This is what it means for white persons to do justice in a multicultural setting. Only after the decision to take the powerless position, to bear the cross, could they be resurrected to new life in the new creation where everyone is equal. On the other hand, people of color, in a multicultural setting, would not need to choose the cross because by being themselves they were powerless and, therefore, on the cross. What they needed to know was that they are blessed and would be resurrected to the new life of empowerment. “Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are you that hunger now, for you shall be satisfied. Blessed are you that weep now, for you shall laugh.” Luke 6:20–21, RSV