RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT APPENDIX RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 151 A Story of Two Calls: The Intake Process for Misconduct Complaints HEATHER BOND Heather came to this work in Misconduct and Safer Congregations at the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) after thirty years in the for profit world where she worked as the director of administration for three law firms, managed a group medical practice, and was the general manager for two manufacturers. She now serves as both the budget and safe congregation manager for the Congregational Life Staff Group and the intake person for the Office of Ethics and Safety for the Office of the President. She and her spouse live in New Hampshire with their two black cats, Mika and Gus. A good intake process is more than a set of guidelines to follow. At the end of the day, it’s about the stories you hear and your ability to sort through what you’re hearing and respond well and in a trauma-informed way. Here is the story of two calls I’ve fielded in my time doing intakes for the Unitarian Universalist Association’s (UUA) Office of Ethics and Safety for the Office of the President. Although some of the processes described are specific to my organization, I hope there are key themes and practices that you will find useful in your work as well. Story 1: A self-identified woman calls the complaint line. Her first words are, I’m so upset, I just can’t believe a minister would do this! Conclusion: The minister is informed there is a congregant with early stages of dementia who is fixated on him. Story 2: A self-identified woman of color calls the complaint line. Her first words are, I’m so upset, I don’t know what to think. Am I right to think a minister shouldn’t behave this way? Conclusion: A formal misconduct complaint is filed, investigated, and adjudicated. The minister loses their accreditation with the denomination. How did story 1 and story 2, which began so similarly, wind up with such different conclusions? The intake process for a misconduct complaint phone line or email account can attract all kinds of callers for a multitude of reasons. People do not call or email the intake person just for misconduct claims, so let’s get that out there first. What types of calls do we get as intake people? 1. Informational 2. Help managing a known or newly discovered sex offender 3. Help with destructive community members 4. Help with a community conflict that is not religious professional misconduct 5. Asking for help, but not in our denomination or religious community APPENDIX 152 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE 6. Calls complaining about behavior that is not actionable per the policy (i.e., a minister is in an open marriage) Finally, we get misconduct calls. Those, too, can be separated out into categories, but how does one do that? Here is the process I go through with every call. 1. Let your phone to go to voicemail so you have time to prepare. You can call back immediately if it’s an emergency, but that is rare. I find it’s better to email or call to arrange a time when both of us won’t be rushed to talk. My outgoing voicemail message clearly states that this is not an emergency line, and people should call 911 if they have an emergency. It also asks callers to leave their phone number, to spell their name, and to provide an email address. Our internal standard is to get back to a person within 24–48 hours. 2. Do your homework: a. Look up the person in the database, find out if they are a member of a congregation/ community, chat with the regional staff for that community to find out if there are already known issues. b. Before the call, start a document with any information you know. I write an email to myself, but you can do this any way you want. c. Think trauma-informed: the person may not tell their story in a coherent order, so be prepared to start in the middle or even at the end. In whatever way you are keeping notes, leave room for the part that comes before what you’ve already written down. Sometimes it’s easier to keep this record by hand so you can write notes with stars and arrows and even numbers. 3. Let the caller know you’ve set aside time (e.g. 1 hour) to talk to them and are willing to schedule another call if necessary. This takes the pressure off having to get something done immediately. 4. Introduce yourself and describe what it is that you do. I have an elevator speech practiced and ready to go.1 5. Make it clear to what extent this conversation is confidential. Typically, I keep this initial conversation confidential between the two of us unless there is an immediate danger or crisis present in the conversation. If you will be looping in someone else from your denomination or organization, make sure this is clear from the get-go. 6. Ask the complainant to introduce themselves. What are their pronouns? Do they feel comfortable telling me what community and what spiritual leader they’re calling about? What is their role in the community? Are they in leadership? This is very important to the UU process, in 1 First, let me introduce myself. I’m Heather Bond, I’m the intake person for the Office of Ethics and Safety here at the UUA. What that means is that I’m here to listen to your story and explain which of the several paths we have that would be most appropriate for your particular situation. You don’t have to tell me everything, but I need enough to be able to figure out which way I should point you in order to continue a process to help. I’ve set aside an hour for this call. In my experience, an intake call can last anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes. If at any time you want to terminate the call, think about what we’ve talked about, and call back later, we can certainly do that. Why don’t you tell me something about yourself and why you’ve contacted me? If they want to know about my background, I take two minutes and tell them the short version: I came to this work through being an HR professional. I’m not a minister; I’m not a therapist. I’ve been doing this work now for 13 years. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 153 many instances. Make sure you gather the basic information needed for your organization’s process while also building rapport with the caller. 7. Once introductions are done, take a breath. Literally take a breath—maybe two or three. Tell the complainant you’re breathing deliberately to give a few seconds for both of your thoughts to settle down. 8. Ask the complainant why they called. a. Ask open, non-leading questions like, What prompted you to call? Or, How can I help you? It’s best to avoid questions like, What is your complaint? Or, What’s your problem? b. Let them talk for a while, even if it’s incoherent. Make non-verbal sympathetic sounds (mmm, mmhmm) so they know the line has not been disconnected. 9. Next, ask gentle questions. When did this start? Where did this happen? Clarify the basics: when, why, who, what, how? a. See if they are now ready to give you the congregation and minister name, if they have not done so already. 10. Move on to the harder questions.2 Don’t be afraid of the hard questions: What were your expectations of the encounter? Do you have a sense for why it went so wrong? How do you feel? How did you feel? Have you told anyone else about this? (There’s no need to name who they have told. This is just to know if you are the first person they have shared with.) a. Other questions, but only if there have been hints about this in the conversation: Just to clarify, was the religious professional drinking/impaired? Were you impaired or feeling vulnerable? Physical or other disabilities noted? b. Important question, Did you talk to the religious professional about this at any time to express your feelings? 11. Thank them for calling and for sharing. Acknowledge you know how hard this can be. Express out loud your understanding that this is upsetting. 12. Pause and breathe more whenever it seems like it would be helpful. 13. Start reflecting back in chronological order to be sure you have accurately captured their story. (This is where your notes come in.) Many times, this is the first time the complainant has heard their story in some kind of order, and it can be traumatic; often there are tears. 14. If what you’ve heard so far constitutes misconduct according to the policy, be measured and supportive. I’m so sorry this happened to you. Or, It sounds like a horrible time in your life. 2 It’s important to ask questions that can provide you important details without implying that any harmful behavior was the fault of the caller. Taking care to have a non-judgmental, respectful tone is crucial. Victim-blaming has no place in any organizational process. APPENDIX 154 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE a. They will want you to agree with them. Try to be more empathetic and sympathetic than in agreement, unless it’s egregious. 15. Ask, what do you want to come out of this call? Outline the possibilities and explain the differences between them. This is the process part of the call. Some options are: a. A formal complaint b. A letter to the religious professional’s file (for incidences that may not rise to the level of an accreditation review) c. Just someone to listen d. Something else you can offer? 16. Depending on the scope of your role, you may end your call here and pass the complainant’s information on to another body. Be sure to let the complainant know who you will be contacting next, their role(s), and what they may do with the information. 17. If your role requires you to determine whether the complaint ought to be escalated to investigation and adjudication, take the following steps as well: a. What if you see no ministerial misconduct? i. Be honest and kind: This does not rise to the level of a credentialing review or The actions are not in violation of the policy. ii. If it’s on the edge of qualifying as misconduct, or the behavior was a minister doing something ill-advised but that does not constitute misconduct, offer a letter to the file. Make sure the complainant understands that the religious professional will receive a copy and therefore be able to respond. iii. Let the complainant know who you will be contacting next, their role(s), and what they may do with the information. b. What if you see no spiritual leader misconduct and you fear the person is going to tear the congregation apart over their complaint? i. Be honest and kind. What do you want to get out of this process? What do you see as the potential consequences for your continuing with this process? ii. Be clear that the UUA (i.e. your community) will not be supporting them in this complaint and why. Be specific about your organization’s policies and procedures. c. Make sure they have followed their own congregation’s procedures. In a spiritual tradition or denomination with congregational polity, most local communities have policies to address XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 155 individual problems with spiritual leaders of the more common kind (i.e., bullying or tokenism). Those pathways need to be explored before a complaint can be filed. Let’s Go Back to Story 1: “Darlene” and I exchanged a couple of emails and found a time to talk. In the meantime, I did my homework. She was listed as a member of this congregation and was 78 years old. This was a new minister at her congregation who was a cis male with a wife and a child on the way. The regional field staff had no mention of any problems in the congregation. They had done a start-up weekend for the minister a few months before. (This is a traditional service to provide the minister and board with joint leadership training held during the first six months of a new ministry.) This woman was not at the start-up and wasn’t in leadership at this time. There had been no complaints or calls for help to the regional staff before this call to me. After introductions, Darlene told me why she was so upset: The minister was coming on to her and it was just disgusting! How could a minister do that? His wife knew about it. She could tell because the wife ignored her and wouldn’t look at her anytime they were in the same room. To my question of, Had she talked to the minister about this? She said she would get up and stand at the back of the sanctuary during his sermons and glare at him because that’s when he did it. “Did it”? I asked. Yes, all of his sermons are just full of hidden innuendos that make it clear he is coming on to me. I asked, How do you know it’s you he’s speaking to? She said, He looks right at me at least a couple of times every sermon. I can just tell. He needs to stop it. I’m a widow, for heaven’s sake, he shouldn’t be coming on to me. I asked her some more questions about her life, how long had she been widowed. Did she have any family near? And then tiptoed back into the complaint: When did this start? (Around Christmas time.) What is it that would make you feel better about this? (He should stop it!) Does he ever say anything outside of his sermons directly to you? (No, he’s too smart for that.) It had become increasingly clear to me that this was a tragedy happening in front of me. A woman long respected in the congregation was having delusional episodes and was becoming fixated on the new, young minister. Some other details came out: she had given good advice to the wife which had been rejected meanly. She had once been on the board but hadn’t held any leadership positions in seven to eight years. I suggested we both take a deep breath and give me a minute to think about what she’d told me. She had been very angry but was now softly tearful. I suggested I would call the regional field staff and ask them to talk to the minister. Would that help you feel better? Yes, it would. OK, then, I’ll do that. I closed by validating her feelings of loneliness and mental stress but not promising anything besides talking to the field staff. She thanked me for taking the time to talk to her. Not many people do that nowadays, she said. APPENDIX 156 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE I hung up from her and called the field staff that is the primary contact for that congregation. They called the minister and had a conversation. He was clueless, of course. But he jumped on it, found some old friends who confirmed she was indeed starting to slip into dementia and wound up calling her daughter in another state to express some concern. The daughter hadn’t seen her mom in about six months and made the effort to visit her in the next month. The upshot of this is that this woman wound up moving to an assisted living place close to her daughter within the next six months. Let’s Go Back to Story 2: A person calls and says they’re very upset by an action of their minister and is wondering if they should file a complaint. We email and find a time we both have free to talk later that day. Before the call I do my homework: I call the field staff for that congregation who tells me that, as far as he knows, nothing is happening in that congregation. The current minister, a white cis male in his 40s, has been there for five years. And while he has had some conflict with his board and congregation members here and there, there is nothing currently going on as far as the field staff know. The person is listed as a member of the congregation. I check in with the Ministries Staff Group. They don’t have anything in the official file for this minister; however, the head of transitions tells me that there have been rumors about this minister at other congregations in the past. It would be nice, they say, to get something in writing if there is misconduct going on. I call the complainant, “Luisa.” I introduce myself and she identifies herself as a Hispanic woman who has lived in this urban area for 20 years and discovered UUism about 10 years ago. Luisa joined the congregation shortly thereafter and has been in various leadership roles over the years. Luisa jumps right in to the minister is coming on to me and it makes me feel icky. When I ask her to tell me the story, she starts at a walk in the park then backtracks to a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) committee meeting. She then fast-forwards to what happened at an event two months ago. As she talks, I’m putting it in a timeline in my notes and gently questioning for details. When she finishes her story, I repeat it back to her in order, asking at intervals, Is that correct? And, Did I get that right? I make regular compassionate sounds showing I’m listening. Once I say, Oh, yeah, that would make me feel icky too. We are establishing a basic level of trust. Here’s the story when I put it in order: She was asked to co-lead a DEI committee in her congregation. Their task was to come up with and oversee activities in the congregation that would explore DEI and how the congregation could work towards becoming a more inclusive organization. She had a serious conflict with her white co-leader and went to the minister for help. After telling her he was too busy to talk, he then suggested they take a walk through a local park. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 157 Bottom line: She described that he came on to her. I was not just taken aback, I felt icky all over, like I needed a shower. I got out of there as fast as I could. She tried to go back to church as if it had never happened. And for a while, she thought maybe it was a onetime aberration. She resigned from the committee, not willing to ask for any further help from the minister. Several months later, he again approached her in an overtly sexual way. She had told a good friend about the first incident. When Luisa told the same friend about the second incident, the friend encouraged her to call the complaint line at the UUA. Luisa waited to see how sure she felt but realized she couldn’t even go back to church. The thought of hearing his voice gave her shivers. By the time she called me, that last incident had happened two months before. Deep breath. Let’s just sit with this for a minute. These are at least two problematic areas: 1. Going back to the beginning of this story, let’s remind ourselves that nothing was done to address the conflict over the co-leader of the DEI committee. Note that for the record. 2. The minister and his actions towards the complainant. What can the UUA do? Luisa wants to know. We go back and forth on process. She decides she wants to talk this through with an advocate. I tell her it could take as long as a week to match her up and get an introductory email out. In reality, I can usually get this done in a couple days. I sort this out and she gets in touch with an advocate. Over the next couple of weeks, Luisa has some questions. Once a complainant has an advocate, all questions go through the advocate, who I then discuss the questions with. Luisa is tempted to simply file a letter of concern, which is not investigated, but is discussed with the minister by the head of the Ministries Group. He has the right to write a response, and then both documents will be put in his permanent file. The advocate helps Luisa discern how this man’s behavior has affected her congregation and damaged her faith, not merely given her an isolated icky experience. The advocate will support Luisa in the process. She files a formal misconduct complaint. These two stories anchor the range of calls you might receive, from fully without merit (although requiring empathy and action nonetheless) to fully with merit, requiring denomination censure and clergy removal. In between is where most of your intake calls will fall. In time, your ability to evaluate what you’re hearing will grow and your ability to meet the needs of the people with whom you’re speaking and take the right actions will increase. Hopefully this guide will help you navigate your way forward into becoming an experienced intake person, using a trauma-informed approach and always remembering that the person reporting is usually coming from a place of pain. Suggested Citation: Bond, Heather. “A Story of Two Calls: The Intake Process for Misconduct Complaints.” In Responding to Spiritual Leader Misconduct: A Handbook. Edited by Lauren D. Sawyer, Emily Cohen, and Annie Mesaros, 151-157. Seattle, WA: FaithTrust Institute, 2022. APPENDIX RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 159 Centering Victim-Survivors’ Voices BRIAN J. CLITES Brian J. Clites is an assistant professor of Religious Studies at Case Western Reserve University. His current book project, Surviving Soul Murder, draws on 11 years of ethnographic work with Catholic survivors of clergy sexual abuse, focusing on how they have rebuilt their life and faith in the wake of such intense childhood suffering. Trained as a historian and ethnographer, Dr. Clites’s broader teaching and research interests include case studies of how gender, trauma, and power are experienced differently across marginalized religious communities. Voice is fundamental for survivors. When a victim tells you about the misconduct they have suffered, they are revealing invisible scars across their soul. By sharing their intimate trauma, they are inviting you to travel with them on their journey back to wholeness. If you can center a survivor’s voice, they are more likely to work collaboratively with you towards the shared goals of spiritual repair and institutional reform. Survivors who feel heard are also less inclined to seek punitive damages. Too often, however, spiritual leaders inadvertently silence victims, and that silencing inflicts additional harms—not just upon the victim-survivor but also upon the entire faith community. This article explains the importance of voice for survivors of clerical misconduct, and it outlines steps you can take to honor and respect the courage of survivors who come to you, in vulnerability and hope, to share their suffering and rebuild their faith. Voice and Justice For many victims, voice is the most basic act through which they can begin to rid themselves of shame, admit that the harm was not their fault, and begin to reconcile with the trauma of misconduct by a trusted spiritual leader. Through speech, writing, poetry, music, or artwork, a victim who voices their suffering has taken the first step in transforming themself from a victim to a survivor.1 Individual speech can be healing. Bearing public witness can be prophetic. And communal testimony can rebuild the social fabric of a whole faith community. When dark secrets are brought into the light, the spirit of truth and justice can begin to shine. Voice provides victims with a sense of agency, and it is vital towards their journey of reconstructing safe and trusting relationships. 1 Brian J. Clites, “A Theology of Voice: VOCAL and the Catholic Clergy Abuse Survivor Movement,” U.S. Catholic Historian 40, no. 1 (Winter 2022): 81–105. APPENDIX 160 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE But survivors of sexual assault know how difficult it can be to find their voice. Many childhood victims do not remember the details of their abuse until they are in their 30s or 40s, which is a natural psychological response for trauma victims. On top of that delay, survivors often feel deep shame and confusion. This chaos is so all-consuming that some victims and psychologists refer to the effects of spiritual leader misconduct as “soul murder.” In order to repair their souls, survivors must regain the trust necessary for intimate friendships and healthy sexual relations. “The key is connection of the survivor with her history,” the sociologist Carol Barringer observed, “of the present with the past, of the lost and numbed-out feelings with the words that release them.”2 Without first retrieving their own voice, how can we expect a victim to rebuild their relationship with the divine? Listening and Affirming Listening and affirming are key skills for responding ethically to survivors. In the words of survivor and theologian Shanell Smith, “Listen. Validate. Full Stop.”3 It sounds so simple, but the truth is that most of us are better at talking than we are at listening. Whether because of our desire to help, or the common discomfort with awkward silences, many of us are in the habit of responding quickly to the pain of others through vague, generic suggestions. Survivors may feel hurt by overtread theodicies. Try to avoid reflexively dispensing short reassurances like “everything happens for a reason” or “this must be your cross to bear.” Such responses minimize the victim’s pain and do more to ease your discomfort as a listener than to help the victim. Unfortunately, there are no easy answers for victims of spiritual leader misconduct. They have been betrayed by a trusted spiritual leader, and they may also feel betrayed by the divine. They are in the midst of an existential crisis that can be as psychologically daunting as the aftermath of war. To center survivors’ voices, you need to remember that they are engaged in the serious and sacred work of “facing the abusing god.”4 It will take real time and work to begin to repair their faith and trust. Empathy and Apologizing Victims are inherently vulnerable. They are disclosing details about their most intimate pain and suffering. Often, victims come to spiritual leaders before talking about their abuse with anyone else. They might carry deep shame or embarrassment, and the misconduct might have been one of the only sexual experiences in their life. Many survivors who I have met tell me things that not even their spouse or children have heard. You might be the first person who they have told their story to. This is a sacred privilege, and you should respond in the spirit of empathy, trust, and confidentiality. 2 Carol E. Barringer, “The Survivor’s Voice: Breaking the Incest Taboo,” National Women’s Studies Association Journal 4, no. 1 (Spring 1992), 17. 3 Shanell T. Smith, Touched (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2020), 61. 4 David R. Blumenthal, Facing the Abusing God: A Theology of Protest (Louisville, KY: Westminster Press, 1993). XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 161 Lawyers often advise religious institutions not to offer an apology to potential plaintiffs, but I suggest that you apologize as soon as you are sincerely ready to share in the victims’ pain. Few survivors actually want to sue their church, but almost every survivor wants an apology for the harm they have suffered. If you wait until an investigation has concluded, you may lose the opportunity to help the survivor heal spiritually. Honesty and Transparency Over the past five decades, few religious institutions have responded to misconduct allegations with honesty and transparency, but that is beginning to change. While responding transparently may have its legal risks, the decision to withhold information from victims creates even greater spiritual and ethical liabilities. It is OK if you don’t know what to do when a survivor contacts you, but it is not OK to promise help and then do nothing. And you probably can do something, even if you feel powerless or like your hands are A CHECKLIST FOR CENTERING tied. When in doubt, refer the survivor to additional resources, including secular SURVIVORS’ VOICES nonprofits for victims of sexual violence. Here are some of the most important steps that Often, the best referral is the name of you should try to incorporate in order to center the another local survivor who has given voices of victim-survivors in your faith community. you permission to share their contact information. If you don’t know of other When a survivor comes forward, spiritual leaders should attempt to: survivors in your faith community, look for regional support groups for survivors of • Listen attentively sexual abuse. You should help survivors in • Express sympathy your community network with one another, • Bear witness to their suffering or provide the support they need to travel • Apologize and meet with survivors in other faith • Help connect new victims to other survivors communities. • Invite victims to bring a friend / advocate to the next conversation Creating Community for Survivors • If other victims come forward, help them network with one another Trauma victims cannot retrieve their voice • Provide victims with a list of third-party alone. It is essential that they speak, hear, resources (secular and spiritual) and learn from other survivors within the • Always have at least one survivor on your context of community. This relationship judicatory or review board between trauma and community is • Voluntarily disclose all prior allegations, and well-documented by researchers in promptly communicate new misconduct anthropology, communication studies, and allegations to your entire faith community social work. Individual stories of sexual violence are often too big for a single APPENDIX 162 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE voice to express. When survivors come together for communal storytelling, they are often able to share what another has not been able to name for themselves. WHAT TO AVOID: RESPONSES THAT Survivor networks are essential HARM SURVIVORS because the aftermath of spiritual leader misconduct is so painful and It is vital that you avoid responses which make isolating. Through support groups survivors feel revictimized. These mistakes also and survivor conferences, victims can risk damaging the credibility and long-term health uplift one another’s voices to rebuild of your broader spiritual community. If your goal their individual spiritualities, reclaim is to nurture and protect survivors’ voices, try to spiritual spaces and rituals, and confront avoid: the anger and distrust they feel towards • Minimizing the situation the divine. • Justifying the harm they experienced Restoring Your Faith Community • Hiding behind lawyers • Asking survivors to recount the explicit details with Survivors of their assault or rape When spiritual leader misconduct • Forcing victims to revisit the space where the occurs, it damages not just the misconduct took place individual victim and their family but • Insisting on forgiveness, silver linings, or also the entire community. There is divine will serious potential for broader spiritual suffering, the loss of trust, or the erosion • Insisting on prayer or meditation of institutional credibility. Hiding • Silencing or intimidating victims spiritual leader misconduct is unwise • Using non-disclosure agreements because it increases this potential for • Concealing prior allegations communal harm—in addition to leaving the door open to further individual • Shunning victims from your faith community victimization by the spiritual leader. On the other hand, acknowledging misconduct can have the positive effect of increasing faith and trust within your community. Listening sessions provide an opportunity for survivors to share their stories with non-abused members of your faith community. Their stories have the sacred potential to enliven and heal your congregation. Listening sessions have been transformative for Catholic survivors, who drew on the models created by survivors of the apartheids in India and South Africa, where public sessions enabled survivors “to both voice and show the hurt done to them, as well as to provide witness to the harm done to the whole social fabric.”5 If you are considering a listening session, begin by asking the survivor(s) whether they would appreciate the opportunity to discuss their experiences more publicly. If they like the idea, you should follow their lead in terms of creating a session where they feel safe and supported, even 5 Veena Das, Life and Words: Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007), 59. XIDNEPPA RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 163 if that means excluding yourself or other religious leaders from the session, while having trained facilitators present to hold the space on behalf of the survivor(s). Silence and Revictimization When survivors first come forward, spiritual communities often react by silencing them, denying their accusations, supporting the accused spiritual leader, hiding behind lawyers, or attempting to rationalize the misconduct through context or scripture. These reactions are all forms of “revictimization,” a term that survivors commonly use to talk about the new, additional harms inflicted upon them after coming forward to discuss the misconduct they have suffered. Actions that silence, deny, or intimidate victims are all forms of revictimization. Hardball legal tactics such as taped depositions, character defamation, and nondisclosure agreements are also forms of revictimization. If lawyers must be involved, we need to radically rethink their obligation to the victims. If you need to hire a lawyer to investigate the veracity of misconduct allegations, you should direct them to treat the survivors as their primary clients, working not to defend the institution from liability but to create justice for the broader faith community. “Lawyers can help a church be faithful,” Marie Fortune has envisioned, but instead legal counsel usually “helps churches forget who they are.”6 More Subtle Forms of Silencing Even if you are trying to listen empathetically to a survivor, certain conversational habits might cause them to feel silenced or ignored. It is better to continue listening than to offer vague platitudes. Tom Economus, a Catholic survivor and priest, described why platitudes come across as unsympathetic and uncompassionate: “To tell a victim of clergy abuse to ‘forgive and forget,’ ‘pray about it,’ ‘let it go,’ or ‘keep it between us,’ shows a lack of regard for the victim and his or her pain. Victims do not want to hear such unseemly advice, nor do they want to remain silent!”7 The silencing of survivors can take more subtle forms, too, including speaking over the victim, completing their sentences for them, or interrupting them when they hesitate or pause. These subtle forms of silencing are so common in patriarchal traditions that we often fail to recognize the harm they cause.8 Just as voice and positive change hold sacred potential, silence and inaction increase the likelihood of spiritual damage. Silencing or subverting victims’ voices will always eventually cause new spiritual harm to your community. 6 Marie Fortune, “Is Nothing Sacred? 1 Timothy and Clergy Sexual Abuse,” Interpretation: A Journal of Bible & Theology 75, no. 4 (October 2021), 323. 7 Tom Economus, “Buzz Words,” The Missing Link 6, no. 2 (Spring 1998), 1. 8 Kate Manne, Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 4-5. APPENDIX