RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 75 SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO MISCONDUCT What Is Your Agenda? The greatest challenge for the leadership of a community, seminary, or organization in facing the misconduct of one of its ministers/teachers is to decide what its agenda is. What are we trying to do here? What are our values and priorities? We do have choices. Unfortunately, our default position is often the same as other institutions: raise the drawbridge and “protect” the institution from challenge, ignore our theology and ethics, try to “make this go away.” The real tragedy of this “institutional protection agenda” is that it is a lose-lose proposition. In the end, it doesn’t protect the institution. Look around at how many organizations are bankrupt because they chose this agenda and almost always lose in civil litigation. In addition, this agenda does further harm to survivors, abusers, and communities. It extends the brokenness caused initially by one person to the entire institution. For the most part, congregants and students understand that there may be individual abusers within our religious or spiritual institutions. And many people understand that at some point, someone in the community may be harmed by one of them. But when that happens, they trust and expect the institution to act to protect them and others, to call the abuser to account, and to support them in their healing. When the institution then betrays their trust in order to “protect” itself, their betrayal is magnified. Only then does a victim-survivor consider civil action. Only when the institution fails to provide a healing response does the victim-survivor feel that they have no other option. We have another choice in responding. The “justice-making agenda” is a win-win. When the institution keeps faith with its members, responds quickly and appropriately to a complaint, and, as necessary, takes action to protect people in the future, the victim-survivor is well served, the institution maintains its integrity, the abuser is called to change their behavior and stop the harm, and there is the possibility of healing the breach caused by the abuser. Choosing the justice-making agenda requires conscious attention. It does not come naturally. It requires that we stay grounded in the teachings of our spiritual traditions, that we act in accordance with our traditions, not out of a place of fear. In the end, it is the right thing to do; it can bring some healing; and it will cost less in the long run. Hence, a win-win. SECTION 3 76 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Here are your options: Buddhist Perspective Institutional Protection Justice Making Wisdom of Tradition right speech as a way to silence right speech as truth-telling victim-survivors and their advocates Virtue compassion for the compassion for all perpetrator (including victim-survivors) Language “an affair,” “an indiscretion,” sexual abuse by teacher “guru devotion” Lawyer’s Role protect institution from make justice for victim-survivors victim-survivors Policy protect institution from hold abusers accountable liability Money defend the institution restitution for survivors and in civil litigation prevention training 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 77 Christian Perspective Institutional Protection Justice Making Use of Sacred Texts “judge not...” hypocrisy Language “an affair,” “an indiscretion” ministerial misconduct Lawyer’s Role protect institution from make justice for victim-survivors victim-survivors Policy protect institution from liability hold abusers accountable Liturgy or Ritual to “heal the wound lightly” name the sin, grieve, bring healing, make justice Money defend the institution in civil restitution for survivors, litigation, pay lawyers prevention training SECTION 3 78 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Create Your Own Institutional Protection Justice Making 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 79 A Trauma-Informed Approach to Spiritual Leader Misconduct Spiritual leadership is a sacred calling and position, and one that is sustained by trust and authority granted by the community, its members, and formal institutions. When that trust is violated, it is necessarily traumatic for both individual victim-survivor(s) and the community as a whole. Individual trauma results from an event or series of events. A one-time traumatic event may be a car crash or natural disaster while a series of traumatic events may be living in poverty or experiencing domestic violence in a relationship. Everyday discrimination is also a form of trauma that consists of many events put together, such as the racism experienced by Black and Indigenous individuals as well as other People of Color (BIPOC) or the transphobia experienced by transgender individuals on a daily basis. For this reason, we will focus on intersectionality throughout this handbook, acknowledging the compounded effects of trauma on people who are marginalized in our society. (See Section 2: “Power in Spiritual Communities”) To define it succinctly: “Individual trauma results from an event, series of events, or set of circumstances experienced by an individual as physically or emotionally harmful or life-threatening, with lasting adverse effects on the individual’s functioning and mental, physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well-being.”1 Trauma impacts the way we feel, act, think, behave, or relate to the larger world and our experiences. It is anything that happens externally that is too much for us internally. It is when an experience overwhelms our ability to cope or make sense of that event. This is true for both individuals and communities. In responding to trauma, whether our own or another’s, it is imperative that we understand that no two people are the same and therefore all responses to trauma are valid. For example, Lauren and Emily drive to work together and get into a serious accident. Both are physically fine, but pretty shook up. Perhaps Lauren is OK the next day to get in the same car and drive back to work. And maybe Emily takes days or weeks to be comfortable getting into a car at all. Lauren and Emily’s individual responses to the same event have a lot to do with their individual experiences both in the event itself and in their broader lives. Even though on paper they experienced the same event, it impacts them differently. Similarly, a victim-survivor may come forward and share that they have experienced abuse perpetrated by a spiritual leader. They may present in a way that is very upset and very activated. And that may make sense to us as an outsider. This person has experienced something very terrible, and they are expressing that in a way that the listener can personally make sense of. On the other hand, a victim-survivor may present with more of a flat affect. And it may be confusing to us. They’re saying something really terrible happened, but they’re acting very calm, cool, and collected. Someone who is listening without a trauma-informed frame of mind might be dismissive 1 See SAMHSA, “Trauma and Violence,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2022, https://www.samhsa.gov/ trauma-violence. SECTION 3 80 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE of what they’re hearing, saying, “Well, it must not be that bad,” or even, “I’m sure they’re lying.” This of course adds additional harm to what’s already been done. However an individual responds to trauma is what makes sense for that person’s experience of the event, the sum of their past experiences, and the tools they have to process their experience. (See Appendix: “Centering Victim-Survivor’s Voices” by Brian J. Clites and “To Listen Well is to Give Breath” by Azza Karam) As leaders who respond to others’ experiences of spiritual leader abuse, we must be trauma- informed in our work, so that we can do our very best to meet people where they are and not perpetuate additional harm. Being trauma-informed means allowing a basic level of trauma awareness inform the work we do with victim-survivors, complainants, and communities. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) outlines the four Rs of trauma-informed care, which are a helpful roadmap to evaluate whether our processes and practices are trauma-informed. They write that a program, organization, system, or institution that is trauma- informed will: Realize the widespread impact of trauma and understand potential paths for recovery. This is a basic acknowledgment that these things happen, and they are happening in our community. Recognize the signs and symptoms of trauma in clients, families, staff, and others involved in the community, relationships, and events in question. Respond by fully integrating knowledge about trauma into policies, procedures, and practices. Not only are we trauma-informed in our individual responses, but the processes we ask complainants to go through are themselves designed to minimize harm to victim- survivors of abuse. Resist re-traumatizing the individual or the community in terms of what we ask of them and put them through. Beyond our formal responses to abuse, how might our communities foster a trauma-informed culture? Do we interact with each other and spend time together in ways that are safe, hospitable, and respectful of people from diverse backgrounds and experiences? Remember that we don’t know who among us has experienced trauma, how that continues to impact them, and what they might experience every day with regards to their unique, intersectional identity. In the event of abuse or an abusive relationship, the victim-survivor’s voice, choice, and autonomy are taken away. For that reason, a trauma-informed response will center the complainant’s voice, provide and honor their choices, and respect their autonomy. Signs or symptoms of trauma could include physical symptoms such as nausea, headache, exhaustion, loss of appetite, or sleeplessness. Psychological impacts could be depression, distrust, distancing in relationships, or becoming very attached/insecure in relationships. Emotional impacts could be shame, guilt, or self-blame. These are only a handful of examples. Again, someone’s trauma could manifest in ways that we expect, or in a form that is totally foreign to our experience. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 81 Consider expanding the motto “do no harm” to “do no further harm if harm has already occurred.” As you develop your trauma-informed policies and procedures, imagine what it would be like to walk through them from start to finish. Where are the possible pain points where too much may be asked of a complainant? Where are they not given sufficient agency? Address those issues before implementing the plan. Expanding our focus, let’s consider who is impacted by spiritual leader abuse. We have the primary victim or victims and their family and friends. We also have the community as a whole that is impacted by the betrayal of a leader. The person who caused harm is impacted by their own choices, as are their family and friends, peers and other employees. The abuse also impacts the wider mission, reputation, and trustworthiness of the community and institution and its leaders. Keep in mind that the impacts of trauma, whether individual or collective, can take the form of psychological, emotional, physical, spiritual, and relational symptoms. For a more in-depth look at working with communities in the wake of spiritual leader abuse, see Dr. Darryl Stephens’s article in the appendix: “Community Healing after Spiritual Leader Misconduct.” Cultural Humility You may be familiar with the term cultural competence (broadly defined as an understanding of and respect for cultural differences). A more helpful and comprehensive approach to working amidst difference is called cultural humility. The term cultural humility was coined by Melanie Tervalon and Jann Murray-Garcia in 1998 as they were seeking ways to enhance multiculturalism in their work in healthcare. One of the pitfalls of cultural competence is the false idea that there is a kind of checklist or defined set of knowledge that one may master and therefore arrive (and remain) at a state of competence. With this false understanding, we might inadvertently slip into a mindset of “I took a class on that, so I know all about it.” Or, “my best friend or partner is part of that community, so I’m an expert on that experience.” Of course culture is much more complicated than that and cultural humility can be a very helpful reframing of how we engage culture with the posture of a perpetual learner. There are three important values that undergird cultural humility: Lifelong learning and critical self-reflection. We each bring our own experiences, set of circumstances, and identities to the table. We change, grow, and learn more about ourselves year after year. We must be aware of our own social locations and appreciate that there is no end to learning about ourselves or those around us. Engaging in critical self-reflection means we can name where we hold power and privilege, how our identities shape our experiences, and how these things impact our relationships. Recognize and challenge power imbalances. We must acknowledge the very real power imbalances in our organizations and interpersonal relationships. These power imbalances in our communities are typically mirrors of the wider social context of power and inequality that we see in our country and world. We must work to challenge and mitigate these power imbalances everywhere SECTION 3 82 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Institutional accountability. Our institutions must also do the work of cultural humility by engaging in critical self-reflection and working to mitigate power imbalances. Institutions play a critical role in the work to address misconduct by spiritual leaders. Picture an iceberg, where 90% of the The Cultural Iceberg mass is submerged Food underwater. Imagine Festivals that the top of the Holidays • Fashion Performances • Flags iceberg represents Games • Dances • Music surface culture—the Arts & Crafts • Literature things we can directly Surface Culture Language see or experience of other people, like food, festivals, holidays, or Communication Styles & Rules Deep Culture music. But the bulk Facial Expressions • Gestures Eye Contact • Personal Space of someone’s cultural Touching • Tone of Voice worldview is actually Body Language much deeper and often Handling and displaying of emotion Conversational patterns in different social situations harder to articulate, things like concepts Notions of: Concepts of: Curiosity and Manners Self • Time of the self, attitudes Friendship • Leadership Past & Future toward authority, ideas Cleanliness • Modesty • Beauty Fairness & Justice of respect, the often- Roles related to age, Attitudes toward: sex, class, family, etc. unspoken rhythms and Elders • Adolescents values of a community. Dependents • Rule Approaches to: Expectations • Work • Authority Religion • Courtship Cooperation vs. Competition Marriage • Raising Children We offer this image as Relationships with Animals Decision-making a helpful reminder that Age • Sin • Death Problem-solving we don’t know all there is to know under the surface. The best we can do is to be curious and humble in our approach to others. Just as we can’t know the shape of an iceberg from just seeing 10% of it, we don’t know the shape of someone’s inner worldview. Even if we are very familiar with the culture they come from, we must remember that the individual before us is uniquely shaped and formed. Case Studies Consider the following case studies in light of cultural humility and trauma-informed approaches. Case Study #1: Emory Emory (they/them/theirs) is a 25-year-old Asian American trans person who lives in a mid-sized city. For the past six months, they have become active in a new spiritual community called Thrive, enjoying the weekly young adult group both for its social aspects and for the spiritual learning Emory craves. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 83 Friends describe Emory as a vivacious and outgoing person. They work as an executive assistant at a large corporation but dream of being a spiritual teacher one day. Most people in their new community don’t know this, but Emory was actually pushed out of their previous faith community when they came out as trans. It was a crushing blow at the time, but now, several years later, Emory genuinely doesn’t feel the need to share about their past with their new friends. They just feel grateful to have found a home here. Recently, Emory moved into a shared house with three other members of their spiritual community who are also in their 20s. The four of them have become close and enjoy hosting social events and study gatherings for their community. Sue is a teacher at Thrive. She is a cis woman in her 50s, partnered with a man, and worked as a chaplain on a college campus for many years before transitioning to her ministerial role as a teacher, mentor, and counselor at Thrive about five years ago. Sue leads the young adult group and enjoys mentoring Emory and nurturing their natural gifts for leadership. One night at the shared house, Emory walks into the kitchen to hear Jordan, one of their peers, making a derogatory comment about trans people. Emory pastes a smile on their face and act as if they didn’t hear. The group sees Emory and snaps to attention, quickly changing the subject. Over the next few days, Emory can’t shake the suspicion that they were meant to overhear Jordan’s comment. They decide to seek advice from Sue at their regular meeting for coffee at lunchtime on Friday. Sue listens carefully to Emory’s story and realizes this is an excellent teaching moment for a young person interested in going into ministry. “Emory,” Sue says, “there are going to be so many people who want to dim your light. Jordan is not a confident person. He has a fragile ego and is probably jealous that you’ve joined Thrive and become such an outstanding leader in such a short time. You can’t let someone like that get you down. Just let it roll off your back and keep doing your good work.” Emory feels conflicted. On the one hand, they enjoy Sue’s praise and are aware that leaders have to work with all kinds of people, even if they don’t like them or get their feelings hurt sometimes. On the other hand, though, Thrive is supposed to be a safe place. They literally say that on their website. It is also been such a haven to Emory, they feel a sense of dread that they might lose this place if it is not safe after all. Emory starts to feel flushed and their breath becomes more shallow at the thought of being expelled from Thrive as they were from their old home as a teenager. Feeling like they’re 16 again and feeling almost timid, Emory says, “But that wasn’t right what Jordan did.” Sue sighs, “I’m sorry, Emory. But it’s something we all have to go through. As a woman in ministry, I’ve had to deal with sexism my whole career! It’s just part of the deal. We can’t change other people, we can only control our response to them.” Emory feels defeated. They check their phone and say they need to get back to their office. They pat Sue on the back as she envelopes them in a hug, and go to work. SECTION 3 84 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE Sue leaves the meeting feeling unsettled. She gave the best advice she knew how to give, from her own experience. But she feels like she was missing something. She realizes that she has never seen Emory so withdrawn before. Something about them felt very young by the end of their conversation. She checks the time—it’s only 4:30pm—and she picks up the phone. Questions for Reflection: • What power dynamics are at play in this story? How are Emory, Sue, and Jordan all positioned in relation to one another in their spiritual community as well as the larger social structures at play? • How could Sue better embrace the principle of cultural humility in her response to Emory? • Who do you want Sue to reach out for as she’s realizing she missed something earlier in the day? What could she say or do next that would be more trauma-informed than her response so far? • What do you imagine Emory might have needed from their friends in the kitchen? From Sue? From Jordan? Case Study #2: Liam Liam, a 40-year-old gay man, has just recently come out after divorcing his wife, with whom he has a 10-year-old daughter. Liam was raised in a very conservative Evangelical church and feels tremendous guilt both for the divorce and his sexuality. Liam began attending a non-denominational church in his new neighborhood about a year ago and has kept both his relationship history and sexuality from his community. Liam’s ex-wife suspects he is gay, but Liam has never confirmed this because he believes she would use it against him and disrupt the relationship he has with their daughter. About six months ago, Liam started dating his boyfriend, James. Their chemistry was off the charts, and since it was Liam’s first real relationship with a man, he relished all of the new feelings that were both intense and consuming. James moved in with Liam after two months, as Liam has a successful online business and offered his home as a temporary measure while James was transitioning from one job to another. They were so in love, Liam thought it would work out great. However, Liam has noticed in recent weeks that his depression—which he was first diagnosed with in seventh grade—has worsened. He’s having a hard time sleeping and has all but lost his appetite. He thought he was OK with being in a relationship with a man, but he wonders if God is punishing him for leaving his wife and being intimate with James. Liam isn’t sure who he can turn to to talk about the spiritual questions that keep him up at night. He checks his church’s website and sees that there are lay counselors that volunteer to meet with fellow church members. He fills out the online form. Soon Liam is matched with a counselor, Jeffrey, a man in his 60s who is an elder in the church and has been married to his wife for over 35 years. Jeffrey is very involved in the church and even preaches on occasion. Liam has never met Jeffrey before, but knows who he is and has heard him preach a few times. He’s relieved to have someone with such a depth of spiritual wisdom to talk to. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 85 Over the course of three or four weekly sessions, which usually take place over beers in Jeffrey’s man cave (a converted garage off his family’s living room), Liam comes out to Jeffrey and explains that his symptoms of depression have been worsening since James moved in. Jeffrey shares that he himself is attracted to men but decided as a teenager that it was God’s plan for him to marry a woman and raise children. He wonders aloud if Liam’s depression is a sign from God that he is not on the right track. Distraught, Liam leaves. His worst fears have been confirmed by this spiritual leader, and he wonders if the only solution is to become celibate. But he loves James and feels sure that their relationship is healthy. For some weeks, Liam avoids going to church. He visits his doctor to talk about treatment for depression. He ignores Jeffrey’s calls and texts, not feeling up for any more sessions. One day, Liam listens to a voicemail from Jeffrey, where Jeffrey clearly states he is tired of being ignored. He puts Liam down, cusses him out, and uses an ugly slur. Shocked, Liam deletes the voicemail and throws his phone onto the couch. Witnessing this, James asks what’s wrong. Liam confides in his partner all the doubts and confusion he’s faced since they moved in together, culminating in this abuse by Jeffrey, who was supposed to be a helper, and who Liam was sure would have some answers for him. James encourages Liam to reach out to the ministry director in charge of the lay counseling program at his church. Melissa is the director of congregational care and has led the training for lay counselors for many years. She personally trained Jeffrey and has never had any complaints about him as a counselor. She’s shocked when she receives Liam’s email and reaches out right away by phone. “Liam,” she says, “first of all, I just want to say that I’m so, so sorry that you were mistreated by a member of our team. That is never OK.” As soon as he hears this, Liam wells up. One thing he didn’t expect was this earnest humility after his experience with Jeffrey. Melissa asks if he would be comfortable coming into her office to talk more about what happened. She is forthright that she is required to make a report to the personnel committee, but that he is welcome to be as involved (or not) as he would like. Liam is very nervous about Melissa’s report. He is sure that he does not want his name included, because he is not out, and he does not want to take any chances that his wife could find out that he’s gay and use it against him in their on-going custody case over their daughter. With her assurance that he will not have to take any action or be named, he feels immense relief and sets up a time to meet with Melissa. To prepare for her meeting with Liam, Melissa reviews the church’s harassment policies and procedures. She makes sure to schedule the meeting for a time when Jeffrey is not expected to be in the building. Without mentioning Liam, she lets her supervisor know that they need to pull Jeffrey from all his counseling responsibilities and that she will file a report with more details by the end of the week. SECTION 3 86 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE When Liam arrives, he finds Melissa’s office to be warm, inviting, and private. She offers him something to drink and he accepts water, settling onto the couch, feeling nervous. “First of all, I just want to thank you for your willingness to speak with me,” Melissa says. “I wasn’t sure that I would, but my boyfriend really encouraged me. I appreciated your response to my email,” Liam replies. Melissa is gentle and quiet throughout the conversation, and Liam gets the sense that she has all the time in the world. When he shares his concerns about being outed, Melissa is affirming and does not pressure him in any way. Once Liam has gotten through the story, Melissa explains the process of what will happen next on her end, checking in along the way to see if Liam has any questions for her. Leaving their conversation, Liam feels heard. He notices that he feels unsettled about reporting anonymously, but he doesn’t feel overwhelmed by the feeling and, checking in with himself, feels sure he doesn’t feel pressured to change his mind. Melissa gave him a referral for a licensed therapist who has no connection to the church and is themselves queer. Liam is looking forward to reaching out to make an appointment in a couple of weeks. For now, he just wants to make some space to rest. After Liam leaves her office, Melissa feels tired but good. She’s disappointed in Jeffrey and her heart aches for Liam. She wishes that Liam would be willing to come forward, but truly understands his reasons for not participating in the process. She feels good knowing she will be able to process everything with her supervisor tomorrow. She sits down to complete her report and before she leaves at the end of the day, she drops Liam a quick email just thanking him for sharing with her. Questions for Reflection: • What power dynamics are at play in this story? How are Liam, Jeffrey, and Melissa all positioned in relation to one another in their spiritual community as well as the larger social structures at play? • What cultural and theological beliefs might Jeffrey hold that could have informed his abusive behaviors? What could the institution do to address these kinds of beliefs during the selection, training, and supervision of volunteer counselors? • What do you like about Melissa’s responses and approach to Liam? Is there anything you would do differently? What additional follow-up could Melissa offer to Liam? • How can Melissa and her supervisor employ a trauma-informed framework to address the alleged abuse with Jeffrey throughout the complaint process? 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 87 Theological Foundations for a Response to Spiritual Leader Misconduct Any attempt by a community or organization to engage in response to spiritual leader misconduct or abuse must be grounded in theology and ethics. This is one of the biggest mistakes that institutions make when they set out to establish policy and procedures to address complaints; they focus most of their energy on the nuts and bolts of policy and have their lawyers carefully review the particulars, and then finally, at the end, tack on a supposed theological/ethical justification. Rather, we need to begin with our theology and traditions, using this as a valuable resource to guide us in the on-the-ground response to complaints of misconduct. This process will be different for each community, seminary, or organization because each will highlight different theological principles. However, the process is important. For Jewish Communities All the same, religious leadership demands a high level of integrity. Religious leaders are moral and spiritual exemplars, representatives of God to the people they are charged to teach, inspire, counsel, and lead. The behavior of any religiously observant person—but especially that of a spiritual leader—is especially sensitive to being a Kiddush Hashem (a sanctification of God’s Name) as well as its converse, a hillul Hashem (a desecration of God’s Name). Their successes and their failings can and do reflect on the One they represent and impact the religious behaviors and beliefs of their adherents and students, both positively and negatively. When leaders are guilty of desecrating God’s Name, they betray God and foster disillusionment and even cynicism in the community. It is for this reason that the Talmud reminds us that when learned, religiously observant people are honest and pleasant, others are impressed with them and the spiritual tradition they represent. Conversely, when such people are dishonest or discourteous—to say nothing of abusive—others blame the tradition and God that they claim to represent.1 When spiritual leaders cross inviolable boundaries, they bring discredit to their calling and should be held accountable publicly. In fact, “wherever there is desecration of God’s Name, honor is not extended, even to a rabbi.”2 Leaders must be accountable for their wrongdoings. Allowing them or enabling them to violate the authority and privilege of their positions without any restraint or accountability undercuts the community’s trust, undermines adherence to the community’s values, alienates congregants’ from God, and allows victims to be continually and systemically revictimized by those individuals, institutions, and movements whose duty it is to protect them. —Rabbi Mark Dratch For Buddhist Communities Although we mentioned in the first section that some suggest Buddhist teachers and leaders require additional training to respond to misconduct, Buddhist teachings do provide a solid ethical and theological foundation upon which to build. What is most crucial is an accurate and non-harmful interpretation of these teachings. As we have heard from survivors (highlighted in Section 1), some teachers misinterpret and misuse teachings to support or rationalize their harmful behavior. 1 Talmud, Yoma 86a. 2 Talmud, Berakhot 19b. SECTION 3 88 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE One critical issue is the teacher-student relationship. In any Buddhist tradition, the teacher is regarded as the spiritual authority and/or the organizational leader. This creates a power imbalance between the teacher and student. This dynamic can be exploited by the teacher to facilitate misconduct, as the student may be coerced into doing what the teacher suggests because they are seen to be spiritually advanced. Coercion may also occur because the student may not want to jeopardize their spiritual progress, which is often seen as in the hands of the teacher. These power dynamics also can perpetuate the continuation of misconduct. The student may want to speak out but does not feel able to because the teacher could shame or reject them from the sangha. When victims do speak out, they are met with disbelief and denial by other sangha members and, sometimes, are shamed by them for speaking ill of the teacher. Such power dynamics make it incredibly difficult for victimized students to speak, for their experiences to be validated, and for the teacher to be held accountable. In Vajrayana Buddhism, the samaya vow between a teacher and a student has been misinterpreted to mean that students do not question their teacher’s actions for they risk punishment in future lives. Samaya actually means a commitment with someone to uphold and view them in their fundamental goodness. It is not a one-way relationship but a mutual relationship in which the teacher protects the well-being of the student and never harms them. As a two-way relationship, students should and can question their teachers when they observe them doing harm or experience harm from them directly. This is often easier said than done; it’s important that we create communities in which things like samaya vows are taught within a victim-centered and trauma-informed context so that students know that speaking the truth about abuse is not a violation of samaya vows. Even though a concept of samaya may not be shared across all Buddhist traditions, addressing the power imbalance in the teacher-student relationship does cut across all traditions. As discussed in section 1, teachers, gurus, and leaders are meant to uphold their precepts and vows. These precepts and vows do not imbue them with power but are reminders that their role is to relieve suffering and do no harm out of great compassion. Furthermore, the Three Jewels and the teaching of oneness reminds us that all sangha members have a responsibility to relieve suffering and address harm as they perceive it. Spiritual power is not a hierarchy—it is an interconnectedness established through our oneness, our Buddha-nature, our compassion, and our shared sufferings. (See Appendix: “The Buddha Would Have Believed You” by Bhante Sujato) For Christian Communities Many denominations point to general expectations of clergy in their policies and doctrines, such as avoiding “conduct unbecoming the ministry.” While this language is not adequate for a policy, it does suggest a high standard of integrity in ministry. Jesus said to his disciples, “occasions for stumbling are bound to come, but woe to anyone by whom they come! It would be better for you if a millstone were hung round your neck and you were thrown into the sea than for you to cause one of these little ones to stumble.” Luke 17:1-2 (NRSV) 3 NOITCES