RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 119 Third-Party Reports: How Do We Process Them? When a spiritual leader violates their community/organization’s policy, an affected party (complainant) may come forward and make a complaint to the governing body or judicatory. The governing body’s procedure will most likely request that the complainant present a written, signed complaint that states their allegation of misconduct on the part of the spiritual leader. This statement then becomes evidence that, along with any other evidence or complaints filed by other complainants, will be used by a committee to adjudicate the complaint, i.e. to determine whether or not the judicatory, seminary, or organization policy has been violated. One of the common concerns expressed by those who are developing or implementing organizational policies on spiritual leader abuse is the question of “What do I do when I indirectly receive information about a spiritual leader engaging in unprofessional conduct?” There are several different circumstances under which this might occur: 1. Rumors: Second- or third-hand rumors may be passed to a judicatory administrator. It is virtually impossible to act on information that is presented only as a rumor. It is important to try to acquire some actual evidence or a first-hand report in order to activate the procedure. One must always be cautious about rumors because they may represent malicious false reports. On the other hand, an administrator would do well to attend to rumors as a signal to pay close attention to future reports about a particular situation. 2. First-Hand Information from a Third Party: In this situation, someone may come forward with information based on their witnessing a spiritual leader in violation of the judicatory/ organization policy, e.g. being sexual with a congregant or client. The third party may be willing to file a complaint, but the recipient of the sexual contact by the spiritual leader may have no interest in a complaint. The person involved with the spiritual leader may see themselves as a “consenting adult” in a sexual relationship with the spiritual leader and in no way a victim of abuse. This circumstance should not limit the process of the governing body in investigation and adjudication of the third-party complaint. The question for consideration is: Did the spiritual leader violate the community/organizational policy? The third-party report of first-hand information is important evidence. The absence of a “victim” is not relevant and should not deter the governing body from pursuing the case. However, it must be first-hand information, i.e. conduct on the part of the spiritual leader that was actually seen or heard by a third party. 3. A Confession by the Spiritual Leader without a Victim’s Complaint: Likewise, the question here is: Is there evidence that the policy was violated? Certainly, the acknowledgement by the spiritual leader that they have engaged in this activity is the best evidence available. SECTION 3 120 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE In circumstances of first-hand information from a third party and a confession by the spiritual leader without a victim’s complaint, the governing body’s procedure should be implemented in order to adjudicate the individual case. Occasionally, there will be a complainant who comes forward and shares their experience with a judicatory/organization administrator, but is then unwilling to file a formal written, signed complaint. This unwillingness is usually the result of their fear of confronting the abusing spiritual leader or of that person knowing their identity. However, the complainant wants some action; in short, in coming forward they want this misconduct to stop. It is important to help the complainant understand why the written, signed complaint is important and that it will expedite the process. The administrator might also ask the complainant if they know of others with similar experiences. Would they contact any of those persons and ask them to come forward? Would they be more comfortable filing a complaint if there were others doing so as well? Some policy/procedures have allowed for the organizational administrator to file the formal complaint on behalf of the victim if they are convinced of the complaint’s veracity and of the necessity to protect the victim through anonymity. A policy can provide for this option for the administrator to be the third-party complainant, which would then trigger an investigation. The question that always challenges the organizational administrator or committee is what will be the result of their not acting on information that comes to them, which may later result in someone else being abused. This also becomes a question of legal liability. Did you choose not to act on information you had and was someone else harmed as a result? 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 121 Complaint > Investigation > Adjudication When a congregant/student comes forward to disclose that they have been subjected to boundary violations by a spiritual leader, they should immediately be connected to the designated person to receive a complaint. That person should respond with sensitivity and assurance that the community/organization takes this matter seriously and will respond. The complainant should receive a copy of the policy and an overview of what will happen. They should be informed that a written complaint is required to begin the process. Ultimately, the adjudication process should answer two questions: 1. Does the alleged conduct by the spiritual leader represent misconduct as defined by the policy itself? The Adjudicating Committee reviews the policy, evaluates the situation within the context of the policy, and analyzes whether the totality of the circumstances indicates that the conduct falls within the policy prohibitions. For example, if the complaint alleges that the minister was intoxicated at the New Year’s party at a community member’s home, this would likely not be covered and should be addressed in some other way. If, however, the complaint alleges that the minister was intoxicated and made sexual advances toward a community member, then we have an allegation of conduct prohibited by the policy. In some cases, although the presenting problem may be couched in terms of sexual harassment or sexual abuse, the conduct may not fall within those prohibitions, but may be problematic nonetheless. Systemic or organizational issues may contribute to the problem. In such cases, the governing body may refer the matter to the appropriate body for consideration and may implement any recommended corrective actions to resolve the problem. 2. If the alleged conduct by the spiritual leader is covered by the policy, then is the allegation substantiated, unsubstantiated, or inconclusive? Do you believe this actually happened? The answer to this question will come from an investigation (i.e. a gathering of facts and information) and an adjudication process in which the evidence is weighed and a judgment is made by the committee authorized to carry out this function. Engaging a neutral expert to do the investigation is preferred. If the results of the investigation are to be trusted by all parties, it should be done by someone who does not have relational or collegial ties to any of the parties, has the professional expertise to perform such work, and is compensated for the work. A sexual harassment or sexual abuse complaint is not the time to save budget dollars by having a volunteer conduct the investigation. However, if the governing body chooses to appoint SECTION 3 122 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE a committee to do the investigation, it is crucial that these persons be adequately trained and are not associated with the accused or the complainant. Ideally, the governing body should engage an investigator as promptly as possible, and the investigator should begin the inquiry within a few days after receipt of the written complaint. The investigation will cover the circumstances of the complaint, the people directly involved, and anyone who may have first-hand knowledge of these circumstances or other relevant information. The investigator is looking for information that would confirm or deny the allegations of the complaint. They might request copies of correspondence (e.g. emails, letters, text messages), calendars, or diaries. Since others in the community may have had similar experiences with this minister, this is also the time to review any previous inconclusive complaints in this community, to discover whether the spiritual leader had any complaints at other places where they served, and to investigate whether the spiritual leader has any relevant criminal or civil charges. The investigator presents the information to the Adjudication Committee, which weighs the factual findings and decides whether the accusations are substantiated, unsubstantiated, or inconclusive. (See “Investigator Role” above) 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 123 Guidelines for Assessing Evidence Remember, in assessing the evidence presented to support a complaint, the goal is to determine whether the judicatory policy regarding spiritual leader conduct has been violated. For example, if the policy is descriptive of the behaviors considered unethical, then the committee’s job is to assess: Does this behavior fall under the policy and did it take place? If it did, then the policy was violated, and the procedure provides for the next steps. (See “Complaint > Investigation > Adjudication” above) Sometimes an abusing spiritual leader will acknowledge some violating behavior and then insist on making an explanation about how and why. For example, “She came onto me”; “He’s an adult and knew what he was doing”; or “I was going to pay the money back.” These explanations are irrelevant to the determination of the committee. If the policy is clear about the nature of the unethical conduct and about the responsibility of the spiritual leader to maintain the boundaries of the ministerial/teaching relationship, then the only relevant question is: Did the behavior take place? The committee should determine its standard of evidence prior to adjudicating a complaint. In other words, how much evidence will convince them that unethical behavior did in fact occur? The legal standards are instructive on this point. • In a criminal proceeding, the standard is “beyond a reasonable doubt,” which means that 90 percent of the evidence must support the complaint. The reason for this high standard in our legal system is that a criminal conviction usually carries with it incarceration, i.e. the denial of one’s freedom, so we must be very certain of the accused’s guilt. • In a civil proceeding, the standard is “a preponderance of the evidence,” which means that at least 50 percent of the evidence must support the complaint. In other words, is it more than likely that the behavior occurred than that it did not occur? Since the action of the judicatory is not a criminal proceeding and our concern is to determine whether there was a violation of the ministerial/teaching relationship, the civil standard is quite adequate for our purposes. The committee needs to be clear on this before it begins hearing evidence. In making your assessment, be aware of the following: 1. A perpetrating leader will frequently minimize, lie, and deny when first confronted with the complaint. 2. If there are multiple complaints about the same spiritual leader, this is convincing evidence! However, one complaint is enough cause to pursue the matter—i.e., implement the procedures—and one complaint validated is enough cause to discipline the spiritual leader. 3. Look for a pattern. Determine whether the accused spiritual leader’s alleged behavior, the alleged incidents, and/or the situations of the complainants are consistent with what you know about abusers. If a pattern is evident, this is convincing evidence. SECTION 3 124 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE 4. Ask the accused directly about specific alleged behaviors. For example, “Did you have sexual intercourse with her?” “Did you use the church credit card for personal purchases?” “Did you ever kiss her and put your tongue in her mouth?” “Did you call him a [slur]?” Surprisingly, when asked directly and specifically, some abusing spiritual leaders will admit the behaviors. 5. Do not get hooked if the accused asserts that they are being “victimized” by the investigation. If an accused burglar complained that they were being victimized, would you stop the investigation? The process of being called to account may be extremely painful for an abusing spiritual leader, but this is not victimization. 6. When it becomes a matter of the complainant’s word against the accused’s word, do not stop the process. You must reach a judgment based on the “preponderance of evidence” and based on the possibility of future professional misconduct by that spiritual leader. Remember, your first obligation is to protect those who are vulnerable to spiritual leaders. 7. Finally, this is a critical decision for the governing body of your organization. If you decide that the accused spiritual leader did not violate the policy and you return them to their position of trust and they then abuse someone else, the institution faces significant legal liability. You had a chance to stop this person, and you didn’t. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 125 Disciplinary Process If the Adjudication Committee decides that the accusations are substantiated, the disciplinary process begins. There should be several levels of possible disciplinary action available to the committee. (See Section 1: “Who Are Perpetrators in Spiritual Communities?”) A Reprimand: This disciplinary action is appropriate for a complaint in which the behavior is “wandering” and represents poor judgment, and the spiritual leader clearly acknowledges and takes responsibility, is apologetic, and can learn from their mistake. A Suspension: This disciplinary action is appropriate for a complaint in which the behavior is serious and perhaps represents a pattern or indicates other problems (e.g. substance abuse), and the spiritual leader acknowledges and takes responsibility, realizes the gravity of their behavior, and is willing to accept therapeutic help to address the problem(s) in addition to restrictions imposed by the judicatory, seminary, or organization. At this point, the spiritual leader might make restitution to the person who they harmed. A suspension can be lifted and standing restored. However, the governing body of the organization must be clear about the requirements placed on the spiritual leader before it will consider restoring credentials or employment. Even if the spiritual leader has fulfilled every requirement, the leadership must still make a judgment call as to whether they believe this person is now able to minister/teach effectively. Supervision of the spiritual leader should continue. Termination of Standing: This disciplinary action is the most severe discipline that the judicatory can impose. The governing body permanently removes the credentials of the spiritual leader to practice within that denomination or movement or seminary. This discipline is appropriate for child abusers and most other predators. Some argue that it is better to suspend rather than terminate the credentials of a perpetrator to allow the judicatory, seminary, or organization to “keep an eye” on this person and control their behavior. Otherwise, the abuser is released into the community with no supervision. This suggestion only has merit if the spiritual leader will in fact be closely supervised and denied access to vulnerable people in the community. This is extremely hard to ensure. The risk for the judicatory or seminary is that the spiritual leader will still have credentials that they will use to continue to gain access to vulnerable people and thus will continue to abuse. The legal liability here is huge. You had the chance to stop them in your setting and did not. The final step after termination is to notify other judicatories/organizations within the denomination or movement that this step has been taken and that this person no longer serves as a spiritual leader here. The national office needs to track this information. Some communities publish this action along with the comings and goings of authorized leaders. This action should not be kept secret. The spiritual leader has no right to privacy here. Their records should remain available for any future reference checks, making it more difficult for the spiritual leader to move to another community. SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 127 Writing a Report Components of Report In preparing a report to summarize the details of an investigation, we recommend the following components be included: the Scope of Investigation, the Process you will be undertaking, detailed Complaint(s) and Allegations, Conclusions about and Evidence supporting the allegations, and Recommendations to the adjudicating body on whether to charge or exonerate. 1. Scope of Investigation a. Clearly state who and what are you investigating. EXAMPLE Scope of Investigation: This report is an assessment of the allegations of spiritual leader misconduct by [name] in [name of community]. [Name of community] received a statement of complaint on [date] with allegations of spiritual leader misconduct by [name] and in violation of the policy. The investigation team was established in [date] to carry out an investigation/assessment for [name of community]. This investigation team included [name of investigation team members and qualifications]. The scope of the investigation through interviews and a review of evidence (emails, written statements and supporting documentation) was to provide findings as to whether it was more likely than not the actions and behaviors of the accused were in violation of the [name of policy]. The investigation team began [date] and concluded its work with the completion of this final report. 2. Process a. Identify the policy and procedures that were in place at the time of alleged misconduct. b. List what means of evidence you are providing, e.g. interviews, email evidence, other documentation. SECTION 3 128 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE EXAMPLE Process: The team interviewed the complainant and accused, as well as additional witnesses who came forward. Interviews of the complainant and accused were conducted in person. Interviews of witnesses were conducted by Zoom. All investigation team members were present for the interviews, along with an additional person to take notes. The complainant and accused each invited a support person to be present for their interview. The support person did not speak unless a question was directed to them. The investigation team used a prepared questionnaire for the interviews to maintain consistency of questions. Notes from each interview were prepared and reviewed to identify themes. Some individuals interviewed provided an additional written response to the question/statements along with supporting documents and witnesses. 3. Complaint(s) and Allegations a. Restate the complaint and allegations as submitted by the complainant. Do not paraphrase unless you state in the report that you have summarized. Then be sure to provide the original statement in an appendix. 4. Conclusions and Evidence a. Conclusions are based on the “preponderance of evidence” standard, not “beyond a reasonable doubt” (See Section 3: “Guidelines for Assessing Evidence”) EXAMPLE A Conclusions and Evidence: Our investigation leads us to conclude that there is a preponderance of evidence that substantiates the allegations of misconduct in violation of [name of policy]. We have substantiated the allegations through [list example of evidence]. The investigation found the complainant’s testimony credible, and testimony was corroborated by additional interviews and documentation with constituents. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 129 EXAMPLE B Conclusions and Evidence: The investigation team finds that it is more likely than not that the alleged actions and behaviors of the accused were in violation of the [name of policy]. We have substantiated the allegations through [list example of evidence]. We believe the complainant acted in good faith in their report of hurt and harm. The investigators found the complainant’s testimony credible, and the testimony was corroborated by additional witness interviews and documentation. We recommend that the credential for [name] be removed. 5. Recommendations a. Additional recommendations could be provided based on the scope of the investigation. For example, recommendations for additional training for leadership or a revision and review of the organization’s policies and procedures. 6. Appendix a. Should include extra information that is useful to reader, such as full transcripts or emails, screenshots of websites, rosters, letters, etc. SECTION 3 RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 131 Common Derailments Across religious traditions, there are some responses to misconduct that prevent safety and healing and actually create more harm: Compassion: Compassion is an inexhaustible resource that we can draw upon as we navigate the terrain of abuse and misconduct. It is possible to have compassion for victim- survivors and compassion for perpetrators. Compassion for victim-survivors of violence will look different than compassion for perpetrators and those who cause harm. Often, compassion as a concept is used to sidestep our processes in order to avoid accountability for perpetrators. Holding people accountable for their actions can be a very powerful form of compassion. Crazy wisdom and other unconventional teaching methods: Some Buddhist teachers claim their harmful actions are in the service of “crazy wisdom”—that is, bestowing wisdom through unconventional teaching methods like psychological and emotional abuse, sexual abuse, and substance abuse. Others may encourage this and help to shield teachers by claiming that teachers are wise and therefore, their actions are inherently wise and meant to benefit others. These could be intentional tactics to avoid accountability and enable misconduct or the teacher and others could truly believe in the benefits of “crazy wisdom.” Regardless of the intentionality, its harms the victim by justifying the misconduct, invalidating their experience, and sidestepping perpetrator accountability. Forgiveness: Some spiritual traditions have explicit teachings about forgiveness that often play a significant role in communal and individual responses to harm and misconduct. While some traditions may emphasize forgiveness less than others, most traditions are imbued with larger cultural and societal notions or expectations of forgiveness. In either case, we often see forgiveness pushed on victim-survivors from the very start, pressuring them to forgive the person who hurt them. Forgiveness plays an important role in the healing journey of many victim-survivors and not in others. An individual’s relationship to and choices around forgiveness are their own and should not be dictated or demanded by anyone. Guru devotion: Speaking out about sexual violation within the spiritual community may be seen as bringing disrespect to the teacher, the lineage, or the community. In some traditions, guru devotion is seen as means to enlightenment because the guru is considered an enlightened being. Samaya, the sacred relationship between the guru and student, can be used to enable misconduct and sexual abuse because the teacher is seen to be above reproach or because the abuse is defined by the teacher as part of the practice. Mediation: Mediation is an excellent tool for some situations, such as a conflict between peers or a communication roadblock on a team leading to disruptive disagreement. The goal of mediation is to bring two (or more) parties to a resolution or compromise that is satisfactory to all parties. Mediation should be used in situations where the parties involved SECTION 3 132 FAITHTRUST INSTITUTE A CAUTIONARY NOTE Is your misconduct policy dependent upon a conflict resolution or mediation paradigm? Do your procedures propose a mediation between all parties? It is a mis-assessment to conceive of alleged abuse or harm as a conflict or a relationship problem. It’s unfair to burden a potential victim with the notion that they need to solve a relationship issue with the person who they say is causing them harm. have relatively equal power and when abuse and/or exploitation is not part of the issue at hand. Abuse should not be conflated with conflict or disagreement; rather, it is an abuse of power and an exploitation of vulnerability. (See Section 3: “To Use or Not Use Mediation”) Sangha and secrecy: The sangha is one of the three refuges of Buddhism, however there are a few ways that the sangha can enable misconduct and sexual abuse. One way is for sangha members to deny, shame, or victim-blame the survivor when they come forward with their experiences. This is because they too are concerned with protecting the teacher or lineage or simply do not believe the survivor. Another way is through misuse of compassion; other sangha members may validate the survivors’ experience but may also encourage them to have compassion for the perpetrator at the expense of their own healing process. Both approaches encourage secrecy about the misconduct and abuse and sidestep perpetrator accountability. Shooting the messenger: When someone in our community brings forth a complaint of possible abuse and harm, we (as individuals and as a wider community) often experience a period of tumult, pain, and disruption. It can be tempting to “shoot the messenger”—in other words, blame the complainant for the difficulties that arise following the complaint. In truth, the complainant is a courageous member of our community making a choice to seek support from the institution for something they believe is wrong or harmful. It is our job to listen, be grateful for them, and act according to our values, policies, and procedures. Spiritual bypassing: Spiritual bypassing refers to the use of spiritual teachings to avoid or sidestep an issue. For example, the Buddhist teaching of “emptiness” can be misused to invalidate the harm and trauma experienced by victims which also sidesteps accountability for the harm caused by the perpetrator. Another example of spiritual bypassing is the idea that “everything is practice, and practice is everything,” and victims are encouraged to use the abuse to deepen their practice. Again, this sidesteps the issue of misconduct; the perpetrator is not held accountable, reparations are not made to the victim, and harm is likely to recur. When spiritual practice and teachings are used in the service of denial and defense of harm, real-life human needs are bypassed. 3 NOITCES RESPONDING TO SPIRITUAL LEADER MISCONDUCT 133 Therapy: We do not recommend using therapy as a replacement for an investigation and/or adjudication of a complaint. It would be like approaching a burglary where someone broke into your house and took your possessions and referring to a therapist to ask the question, “Does this person seem capable of being a burglar?” This is not the question at hand; rather, did the violation occur, and is this the person responsible? While there are psychological assessments that can lead a qualified professional to diagnose mental health issues, personality disorders, and so on, there is no assessment or psychological profile that can tell us whether or not a person violated the boundaries of another person and if that behavior violates our organizational policies. Once the complaint is adjudicated, we might consult a therapist with expertise in boundary violations to help assess what the next steps should be. Victim-blaming: Victim-blaming refers to words, actions, or beliefs that hold the victim of harm accountable—in whole or in part—for the harm perpetrated against them. There is nothing anyone can do, believe, wear, say, etc. to deserve or cause sexual violence, harassment, or assault. It’s important that we keep victim-blaming at bay in order to focus on the issue at hand, which is to handle the complaint with sensitivity, clarity, and transparency. SECTION