Introduction L H B J EE. UTLER R. L by experience, and new encounters are regularly interpreted by events IFE IS ALWAYS DEFINED from the past. Sometimes the new events articulate new living conditions, and sometimes they expose attitudes within society that had been previously hidden. Either way, some events can be identified as monumental and are experienced as defining moments in history. By way of an example, when Barack Obama became the forty-fourth president of the United States of America, it was monumental and a defining moment in history! His years in the White House not only sought to legislatively articulate a new way of living, but they revealed racial attitudes within America that many thought had been overcome. April was a monumental and defining moment in history. On that day, there was 4, 1968, another “shot heard around the world,” a shot not unlike the Revolutionary War’s first shot on April, in Lexington and Concord. April, called our attention to that defining 19, 1775 4, 2018 moment in American history as it marked the fiftieth anniversary of the assassination of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. In March, I traveled to Memphis, Tennessee, the city where Dr. King breathed his last 2018 breath. The flags hanging from streetlight posts made it clear that Memphis was commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of King’s assassination. In days gone by, Memphis was not unique as an American city divided against itself. During the s, Memphis was 1960 emblematic of the realities of America. This was the era when American violence was photographed and televised for the world to see. As I moved about the city and reflected on the Memphis protest that declared, “I Am a Man,” I had an odd feeling as I viewed the signage declaring, I am Memphis. Other signs asked the question, where do we go from here? For it was in Memphis, at the speed of sound, that violence sought to silence nonviolence and the declaration that Negro lives matter. As a city that sits on the Mississippi River, Memphis conjured for me during my visit a variety of thoughts and images. Reflecting on the life and death of Dr. King while viewing the Mississippi, I was drawn to Psalm. Like those who sat and wept by the rivers of 137.d e vre Babylon, in Memphis African Americans moaned with the sorrow songs of our souls that se r sth somebody called the Blues. A cord was struck in Memphis by an assassin’s bullet that g ir llA produced a blues song in the key of rage. At that moment, the rageful lament of the psalmist.sre h who exclaimed, “Happy shall they be who pay you back what you have done to us! Happy silb u P shall they be who take your little ones and dash them against the rock!” (Ps b– ) became a kco 137:8 9 tS prophetic statement within the United States of America. That shot in Memphis ignited & fp iW rioting in over one hundred cities across America, including Washington DC. Hope dashed..9 1 0 2 People clashed. Buildings burned. Blood flowed. The Dreamer was killed, and the dream © th g became a nightmare for everyone. There was no peace in our waking hours and no comfort in iryp o C our sleep. Able to neither stay awake nor go to sleep, we found our days filled with lament Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. and our nights consumed by torment. Reflections on “why we can’t wait” became more poignant; and the question, “where do we go from here?” became more problematic. The year before King was assassinated, he wrote Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? The book was a critical examination of what America had gone through, and the nation’s prospects for the future in light of the civil rights, human rights movement. The American crisis that resulted from that fatal shot from an assassin’s weapon did not create the chaotic American dilemma; rather the killer merely exposed the chaos and the ongoing American dilemma. What is America’s nature that regarded Black bodies as meat for dogs, trophies for rapists, “strange fruit” for gluttons, flames for hoses, conquests for the lustful, and property for exploitation? To America, the sacredness of Black bodies was sacrilege. Within America, Black bodies were identified as the problem to be dealt with. As African Americans struggled to be citizens of faith and faithful citizens, there was no clear answer on where we could go. At the defining moment of the assassination, the voice of the th psalm resonated 137 with the Black experience in America: “How can we sing the L song in [such] a strange ORD’S land?” (Ps ). Because the spirit of Black America was living in terror while exploding 137:4 with rage, the Lord’s song became the spirituals and the blues. These genres are two modes of storytelling in one dark body’s experience with violence in America. They declared African American spiritual and prophetic needs for justice and peace within America. The Problem Black America has sought to address the continuing American dilemma by embracing King’s beloved community with an emphasis upon an ideology of integration. With an evangelical spirit of Christian piety, Black Americans have been guided by the hope of full citizenship through a vision of America being “one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all,” regardless of race, color, or creed. Unfortunately, America’s approaches to integration have maintained Black bodies as the problem in America. When African Americans are seen as the problem, African Americans are identified as the ones who must change, who must repent, who must forgive, even when there is no confession of wrongdoing by their perpetrator. We witnessed this after the massacre of the Charleston Nine in. 2015 African American Christians offered forgiveness to Dylann Roof even though he had not.d e confessed wrongdoing or repented of his crime. Within the system of Black survival, vre se r sth forgiveness has been part of our spiritual discipline: to forgive, regardless. g ir llA The Christian Scriptures declare: “If you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and.sre believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. For one believes h silb u with the heart and so is justified, and one confesses with the mouth and so is saved” (Rom P kco tS & 10:9–10). Without confession and repentance, there is no forgiveness. With a spirit of fp iW nonviolence, Black Church theology has come to believe that forgiveness is all about God’s.9 1 0 grace and has simultaneously ignored the need to hear confession when we have been 2 © th offended. g iryp o C This attitude of forgiveness without confession has led some to believe that some Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. behaviors require no confession. We have accepted the attitude of King David: “Against you, and you alone, have I sinned; / I have done what is evil in your sight” (Ps NLT). David 51:4, did not consider that he had offended Uriah and Bathsheba, nor did he regard the fact that he placed a contract on Uriah to cover his wrongdoings. Thomas Jefferson, on the other hand, was very aware of the major offenses committed by white Americans against Africans in America. Nevertheless, rather than seeking reconciliation and establishing a new community that regarded Africans as created equal with Europeans, he concluded that Africans were the problem, and it was better to send Africans back to Africa for the sake of peace. When African Americans are seen as the problem, African Americans are compelled to conform to an image of humanity that erases Black skin. When the color of sin is the color of one’s skin, it should come as no surprise that many Black evangelical Christians sing numerous songs about Jesus washing Black bodies whiter than snow. This is another indication of the chaos that governs our existence and the way the problem of America has been understood to be a Black problem. African Spirituality Caring for the spiritual needs of African Americans requires attentiveness to the conditions that fostered African American culture and community. African American religion and culture were born in the midst of chaos and have continued to fight with the steady beat of Black radicalism. The blood of slaughtered Black bodies has marked a path from capture on the continent of Africa through the traumas of the Middle Passage to enduring the indignities to Black humanity in America. Black bodies always being surrounded by White supremacy, like a wheel of resistance in the middle of a wheel of hatred, points to the necessity of pronouncing that #BlackLivesMatter. #BlackLivesMatter is the reframing of King’s concerns regarding chaos or community. Nevertheless, spiritual care in this present age should not ignore our hope in ages past. Truly caring for Black bodies and souls means that Black traumas cannot be viewed in isolation. African American spirituality promoted our survival through an insistence that we maintain our self-understanding as whole and holy human beings. Our spirituality maintained the unity of blood and nonblood relations, public and private life, physical and spirit world, church and community. I am because we are, and because we are, I am..d e American culture socializes its citizens to think about relationships in dichotomies and vre se r sth polarities: i.e., good or bad, right or wrong, woman or man. Being governed by the g ir llA oppositional views of “us against them” maintains chaos by always fighting to prove.sre differences. Because Americans regularly think of relationships as a process of reconciling h silb u differences, when differences cannot be reconciled, the different ones tend to be defined as P kco tS “less than” and labeled the problem for extermination. If our spiritual care practices refuse to & fp iW address the inclination toward extermination within American culture, then Black alienation.9 1 0 and spiritual homelessness will increase. When an image of Black life that was intended to 2 © th destroy African culture guides our ministries of caring for the spiritual lives of African g iryp o C Americans, those care ministries become destructive and self-destructive by reframing Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. #BlackLivesMatter into #AllLivesMatter. The Problem of Projection When African Americans are seen as the problem, the focus of the problem is not American citizenship. The problem is always associated with what it means to be human; and humanity is always associated with what it means to be in relationship with God. This problem of humanity is the underlying presupposition of racism. Racism is always a question of human origins created by the supremacist who wants to see himself or herself as God. There is a psychological interpretation of racism that concludes racism is a projection. That is, racism is the inability of the racist to accept the negativity she or he holds with regard to his or her own personhood. Unable to see themselves as the problem, they project the negativity onto an-other, making an-other the problem that can subsequently be exterminated. It is like someone being asked a question about the alt-right, and rather than acknowledging the alt-right within himself as the problem, he counters with a deflection that is a projection question: what about the alt-left? The alt-right is the formal name for a specific orientation and organization. There is no group that identifies itself as the alt-left. Spiritual care of African Americans must help them to cease from seeing themselves as the American problem. To be released from seeing themselves as the problem in America releases African Americans from the burden of finding the solution to this ongoing American dilemma. When we are able to accept that the problem is not us or ours, but those and theirs who act against us, we experience the freedom we have fought for and died to obtain. At that moment, African Americans will be able to sing with conviction, “Out of a gloomy past / till now we stand at last / where the bright gleam of our bright star is cast.” Neo-Reconstruction As America continues to live in the transitional wake of to, we metaphorically find 44 45 ourselves on the balcony of the Lorraine Motel in Memphis. We are standing at a painful and pivotal moment in history where “the principalities and powers and spiritual wickedness in high places” that conspired to move James Earl Ray to fire that fateful shot are once again conspiring. Whereas there is nothing new under the sun, America is reorienting itself through activities we might identify as Neo-Reconstruction through misinformation and.d e vre miseducation. se r sth g Since 2015, America has been living in an era of Neo-Reconstruction, that is, an era of ir llA.sre Deconstructionist violence designed to return America to a mythical past greatness. The h silb dynamics of this contemporary moment and movement are marked by the violent aggression u P kco that seeks to return us to an imagined golden age of freedom and prosperity. The South will tS & rise again by “making America great again.” Neo-Reconstruction thrives on “revisionist fp iW.9 history” and what are today called “alternative facts.” Where neo-Reconstructionists do not 1 0 2 © like the story being told, they declare “fake news” and rewrite the story to meet their needs. th g iryp The pain of loss, the feeling of being taken advantage of, the frustration from job insecurity, o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. the fear of losing a privileged place in society has resulted in violent outbursts to attack Black bodies as the source of the problem. Book Overview To address the care needs of African Americans, both spiritual and prophetic, focused attention must be given to the ways African Americans experience the national assault on Black bodies. In the same way that there are multiple medical challenges more likely to end the lives of African Americans (like various forms of cancer), there are psychosocial traumas that destroy Black lives at epidemic rates. A spiritual care that affirms that #BlackLivesMatter attends to the ways that African Americans have introjected and internalized the problems of America. Caring for the spiritual and prophetic needs of African Americans is to attend to the ways African Americans have turned aggression and rage inward, resulting in domestic violence in the forms of intimate partner abuse, child abuse, and heritage abuse. A new paradigm needs to be developed that reinterprets Black homicide by Black bodies as sometimes being an act of suicide resulting from the generations of being a problem in America. New paradigms need to be developed that reinterpret substance abuse and addiction, which are bodily self-destruction, as being no different from the destruction of property as another way of terminating the physical world. This book, therefore, has been structured into four thematic sections of caring for Black Lives. Part focuses on caring for victims of violence and the work of social justice to end 1 the violence that consumes Black life. Part focuses on caring for our bodies and the more 2 existential realities that assault our souls. Part focuses on caring for marriages and families 3 beyond gender normativity. And finally, part focuses on caring for Black lives within 4 systems of institutional healthcare where we are often the most vulnerable. These four sections encourage a care that breaks new ground and advocates for life to break in to regenerate African Americans in a violent America through the rallying call that #BlackLivesMatter!.d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. PART 1 Caring for the Victims of Violence and Social Justice Activism.d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 1 From Viral to Voyeuristic When Police Brutality Videos Turn into Black Death Tourism; Self Care for Black Trauma D J B ANIELLE. UHURO Get away [garbled]... for what? Every time you see me, you want to mess with me. I’m tired of it. It stops today. Why would you...? Everyone standing here will tell you I didn’t do nothing. I did not sell nothing. Because every time you see me, you want to harass me. You want to stop me (garbled) Selling cigarettes. I’m minding my business, officer, I’m minding my business. Please just leave me alone. I told you the last time, please just leave me alone. please please, don’t touch me. Do not touch me... I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t 1 breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe,” he said, as officers restrained him. These were the last words of Eric Garner, an obese African American middle-aged male suffering from asthma and cardiovascular disease, on July 17, 2014, in Staten Island, New York City, after a New York City Police Department (NYPD) officer, Daniel Pantaleo, put him in an NYPD policy-banned choke hold for between fifteen and twenty seconds while attempting to arrest him under suspicion that he was illegally selling individual cigarettes.1 When Officer Pantaleo tried to pull Garner’s wrist behind his back, Garner pulled his arms away. Pantaleo then put his arm around Garner’s neck and thrust him to the ground. After Pantaleo removed his arm from Garner’s neck, he pushed the side of Garner’s face into the ground while four officers moved to restrain Garner, who repeated, “I can’t breathe” several times while lying face down on pavement.2 Moments later Garner lost consciousness, and subsequently died. The New York City medical examiner’s office report stated that Garner’s primary cause of.d e death was “compression of neck (choke hold), compression of chest and prone positioning vre se r sth during physical restraint by police.”3 Eric Garner’s name joins an unfortunately long list of g ir llA other noted names: Sandra Bland, Tamir Rice, Sean Bell, Amadou Diallo, Alton Sterling,.sre h Philando Castile, and Mike Brown—just to name few—who were killed by police officers’ silb u P excessive use of force, making the popular hashtag #BlackLivesMatter a trending focus on kco tS Twitter and other social media outlets. & fp iW Initially, the #BlackLivesMatter hashtag sparked popularity following the George.9 1 0 2 Zimmerman not-guilty verdict in which a neighborhood patrolman Zimmerman stalked an © th g unarmed African American teenage boy, Trayvon Martin, in a gated community complex iryp o C when Martin was simply returning home from walking to a convenience store to purchase an Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Arizona Ice Tea and a bag of Skittles. After the verdict was announced, three young African American women who supported the murdered Trayvon Martin—Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tometi—took to Twitter in protest, voicing their anger and frustration, and concluding their tweets with the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter. The hashtag picked up notoriety and was then used by Martin supporters nationwide. Garza, Cullors, and Tometi then went further and turned the hashtag into “a Black-centered political will and movement building project.”4 Their project progressed in 2014, when unarmed African American teenager Michael Brown was murdered by Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson in Ferguson, Missouri, causing outrage and protest primarily from African American community members. In response, law enforcement ignited tear gas and pepper spray on protestors during nighttime hours. Darnell Moore and Cullors organized the “Black Life Matters Ride,” a national fifteen-hour ride during the 2014 Labor Day weekend. Organizers directed riders to travel to protest areas in order to support African Americans in their demonstration efforts. The ride’s results were successful: roughly six hundred people gathered to support protestors in Ferguson and to work to change policy across the nation in depressed communities of color.5 As law enforcement continued using tear gas, pepper spray, and other forms of brutality to halt protestors, #BlackLivesMatter community organizers and protestors turned to social media as a resource to shine light for the nation and world to see on the happenings of Ferguson. Videos began circulating online on Facebook and Twitter showing protestors being tear gassed and pepper sprayed. Just as the media were pivotal in showcasing police brutality against protestors during the civil rights movement, new social media was also helpful in highlighting police brutality against Ferguson protestors.6 Social media has also been helpful in the Eric Garner case, specifically because the actual video of Officer Pantaleo forcing Garner into a choke hold has been viewed and shared widely to date around the world.7 Viewers actually witness his last moments of life and hear the last words Garner ever spoke. The Garner video is similar to two other police brutality videos widely shared online in which the victims’ last moments of life are recorded. According to PBS, “When video of the Baton Rouge shooting death of Alton Sterling first surfaced on July 5, [ ] social media 2016 networks became immediately populated with Sterling’s final moments. The following.d e day, the shooting death of Philando Castile was streamed live by his girlfriend on Facebook. vre se r sth The video, which shows Castile gasping for air after being shot four times by a g ir llA Minnesota police officer, has since been shared on Facebook more than 5 million times.”8 On.sre h September 16, 2016, video circulated online of forty-year-old African American Terence silb u P Crutcher, who was shot and killed by White police officer Betty Jo Shelby in Tulsa, kco tS Oklahoma, as he stood unarmed in the middle of a street trying to repair and seek assistance & fp iW with his stalled truck..9 1 0 2 While uploading and sharing police brutality videos and #BlackLivesMatter hashtags have © th g raised awareness of racism and police brutality in America, according to Monnica Williams, iryp o C clinical psychologist and director of the Center for Mental Health Disparities at the Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. University of Louisville, graphic videos (which she calls vicarious trauma) combined with lived experiences of racism, can create severe psychological problems reminiscent of posttraumatic stress disorder.9 According to a 2012 study that surveyed thousands of African Americans, Hispanics, and Asian Americans, “blacks who perceived discrimination the most, were more likely to report symptoms of PTSD. Although African Americans have a lower risk for many anxiety disorders, the study reported a PTSD prevalence rate of 9.1 percent in Blacks, compared to 6.8 percent in Whites, 5.9 percent in Hispanics, and 1.8 percent in Asians.”10 According to Williams, “Social media and viral videos can worsen the effects. During the week of Sterling’s and Castile’s deaths, a scroll through timelines of black social media users could uncover subtle expressions of mental and psychological anguish, from pleas for others not the share these videos, to declarations of a social media hiatus. These expressions of anger, sadness and grief can hint at something much more serious.”11 “It’s upsetting and stressful for people of color to see these events unfolding,” she says. “It can lead to depression, substance abuse and, in some cases, psychosis. Very often, it can contribute to health problems that are already common among African-Americans, such as high blood pressure.”12 As a result of the “weathering effect,” which is what scientists call the result of cumulative stress associated with confronting racism on a daily basis, “African Americans [regardless of income] have disproportionately higher levels of blood pressure and more instances of chronic disease and earlier deaths than whites.”13 April Reign, a former attorney and now managing editor for the website Broadway Black, which reports on African Americans in the performing arts, adds, “White people used to have picnics at hangings and at lynchings, bringing their children to watch black bodies suffer and die. We are not far removed from that, it’s just being played out through technology now. And it hurts.”14 A social psychology expert and president of the Center for Policing Equity, Phillip Atiba Goff, adds, “The perception that the perpetrators of violence face no consequences for their actions can transform that trauma into terror.”15 According to Goff, “If you’re conditioned to a trauma, and that trauma occurs and recurs in a context where it feels you have no control over it, and it’s being done by powerful people.d e vre for whom there are no consequences—that’s why I’m saying we move from trauma to se r sth terror.”16 g ir llA.sre “That feeling of helplessness and hopelessness can undercut efforts to end police h silb brutality against black people,” said Susan Moeller, director of the University of Maryland’s u P kco International Center for Media and the Public Agenda. “Because the videos are so horrifying, tS & some people try to shut them out and turn away—which makes those individuals less likely fp iW.9 to pursue political action aimed at reform.”17 1 0 2 © th There are some steps African Americans can take to employ self-care and limit stress in g iryp the midst of Black trauma. First, don’t be afraid to log off social media once or twice a week. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Refraining from social media gives persons the ability to rest and reinvent themselves, to build up one’s defense barriers or walls again. Refraining from social media gives persons the opportunity to decrease their anxiety and worry that the overuse of technology can sometimes create. Instead of being online every day, take some time to engage in pleasant mood activities offline such as gardening, exercising, going to the spa, adopting a pet, eating a healthy meal, talking with friends (refraining from controversial topics), observing nature, camping, praying, and meditating. Second, African Americans can refrain from continuously commenting in social media discussion groups and controversial conversations about police brutality. Don’t get baited by others’ Facebook statuses. Refrain from replying to tweets. Resist the urge to be triggered by online chats. Incorporate personal and professional strategies to stop your triggers from arising. Third, sometimes resist the urge to press play on police brutality videos that may come up in your newsfeed. Turn off video auto-play in your Facebook settings. Sometimes refrain from sharing police brutality videos that others may share on your timeline. You may want to consider updating your settings so that others can’t post on your timeline. Subsequently, affirm your individual and collective gifts, skills, and talents. Spend time journaling about what your individual strengths and abilities are. Take a moment to reflect on and post on Facebook or tweet the gifts of your culture, ethnicity, and traditions. Persons sometimes allow their victimization to cloud their perception of their identity, ignoring their positive attributes. Reflecting on your positive attributes and remembering the tenacity of your cultural ancestors and elders will impact your mood and emotions, igniting peace and joy even in the midst of pain. Bring into your remembrance the mountains your elders climbed over, and find courage in their achievements. 1. Capelouto, “Eric Garner.” 2. Schram et al., “NYPD Chokehold Death.” 3. Sanchez, “Choke Hold by Cop Killed NY Man.” 4. “Herstory,” para. 1. 5. Ibid., para. 6..d e vre 6. Ibid. se r sth 7. Feuer and Apuzzo, “With Prosecutors at Odds.” g ir llA.sre 8. Downs, “When Black Death Goes Viral.” h silb 9. Ibid. u P kco 10. Jackson, “Trauma of Police Brutality.” tS & fp 11. Downs, “When Black Death Goes Viral.” iW.9 1 12. Ibid. 0 2 © th 13. Ibid. g iryp o C 14. Williams and Mazzie, “Tackle Problems of Policing, Racism.” Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 15. Ibid. 16. Adetiba and Almendrala, “Watching Videos of Police Brutality.” 17. Ibid..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 2 If They’re Black, Call 911 First Addressing Some White Persons’ Biased Illogical Paranoia and “Personal Racism Valet” Use of Police D J B J D H ANIELLE. UHURO AND AMIE. AWLEY Lolade Siyonbola is an African American graduate student in African studies at Yale. One evening during her spring courses she fell asleep while working in her dormitory common area. A European American woman who lived in the dorm contacted campus police, reporting Siyonbola for illegally being in the common area. Sleeping in a dormitory while Black. Three Black teenagers decided to visit a Nordstrom Rack store in suburban Saint Louis in search of accessories for their prom night when they were followed by store employees who contacted the police to search the teens’ purchased items outside. Shopping while Black. Three Black people were checking out of an Airbnb home in Rialto, California, in April 2018 when they were approached by police, along with a police helicopter flying overhead, after a neighbor alerted law enforcement that the three renters were burglars. Renting an Airbnb while Black. Rashon Nelson and Donte Robinson, both African Americans, were waiting for another man for a business meeting at a Starbucks in downtown Philadelphia in April 2018. An employee asked the two men to leave the coffee shop. When they refused, the police were called. Sitting in Starbucks while Black. What is the internal mechanism that tells some European Americans to contact law enforcement and report African Americans who are simply engaging in daily, nonthreatening life activities?.d e Why do some European Americans use law enforcement as commodified racist weapons vre se r sth against African Americans? g ir llA What is the psychological impact on African Americans who are constantly terrorized by.sre European American harassment via law enforcement? h silb u P kco tS When Threats Occur & fp iW.9 What does threat mean? 1 0 2 © Threat is a feeling that a person experiences when he or she believes that another person is th g iryp likely to inflict pain, injury, damage or danger to his or her survival.18 The controversial word o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. in this definition is feeling. What one perceives as a threat is based primarily on that person’s emotional state and less about the actual actions of the other person who is perceived as the oppressor. How does this happen? According to Dr. Rick Hanson, a psychologist at the the Greater Good Science Center at the University of California, Berkeley, “The alarm bell of your brain —the amygdala... uses about two-thirds of its neurons to look for bad news: it’s primed to go negative. Once it sounds the alarm, negative events and experiences get quickly stored in memory—in contrast to positive events and experiences, which usually need to be held in awareness for a dozen or more seconds to transfer from short-term memory buffers to long- term storage.”19 Thus, in other words, people tend to relate to others, particularly to those who are different, with distrust and pessimism, believing others will take advantage of them. These writers assert that a threatened feeling can be reality or imaginary. The feeling of impending threats can be based on unbiased social historical data. For example, some older African Americans who report being afraid of European Americans experience these feelings based on the period of African enslavement in the United States from 1619 to 1865. At the same time, the feeling of impending threats can also be based on biased, illogical paranoia. For example, when a European American police officer named Darren Wilson in Ferguson, Missouri, was asked why he shot an unarmed African American teen named Micheal Brown, Wilson replied, “It looked like a demon.”20 Aside from the fact that Wilson defined a human being using the pronoun it, Wilson’s response was based on biased, illogical paranoia. There is no unbiased social historical data that suggests that African American boys are demons. Another example can be found in the testimony given by European American male Dylan Roof, who entered a church Bible study one evening in South Carolina and killed nine innocent African Americans. When asked why he committed this act of domestic terrorism, Roof informed law enforcement that something had to be done to stop African American males from continuously raping European American women on a daily basis throughout the country. Again, Roof’s response was not based on unbiased social historical data. How does one began to address some European Americans’ biased, illogical paranoia? Is it the responsibility of African Americans to be the Olivia Pope who “fixes” White folks’ fear? Reflecting on how some European Americans rely on the police must start with how.d African Americans experience law enforcement versus how European Americans experience e vre se law enforcement. According to Vesla Mae Weaver, the Bloomberg Distinguished Associate r sth g ir llA Professor of Political Science and Sociology at Johns Hopkins University, “Let’s start by.sre discussing what happens when black Americans call on the police for protection. First, police h silb take longer to come to their communities—and may not come at all. In Chicago, for u P kco example, one study found that the average time to arrival for calls to police in nonwhite tS & fp neighborhoods was twice as long as in predominantly white neighborhoods. One woman told iW.9 1 me, after waiting for the police to arrive as a 15-year-old girl in her neighborhood lay dying: 0 2 © th ‘They don’t come fast. They give you time to die.’”21 g iryp o Weaver goes on to assert that “nonwhite people who try to enlist law enforcement for help C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. are more likely than whites to themselves come under suspicion. These voluntary callers may find themselves getting searched, detained, or removed from the premises... Things can, as one of our research subjects put it, ‘go left’ very quickly. Black Americans are more likely to be seen as defiant if they ask questions of the police, are reluctant to furnish their identification, or ask the police to leave. Thus, calling the police if you are black can often be useless and slow, and at worst is outright dangerous.”22 However, most European Americans experience law enforcement as “helpful, benevolent, fair, and efficient problem solvers.”23 Incidents of some European Americans calling the police to report African Americans doing nothing but normal daily activities is not a new phenomenon. According to Jason Johnson, professor of politics and journalism at Morgan State University, “I think this has always been happening. What’s been different is that over the last couple years there has been a larger number of White Americans who are empathetic and sympathetic to this kind of harassment. And therefore, mainstream press outlets are actually covering it because there’s an audience that wants to know now.”24 Johnson goes on to say that the ultimate problem is some White people see the police as their “personal racism valets”—meaning just as persons have their cars taken away through a valet process at an upscale restaurant or hotel, for example, likewise some White persons can have black people escorted away, out of sight, like an inanimate object such as a car.25 According to Professor Weaver, “American legal history is replete with evidence of white people saying black people committed a crime (what the legal scholar Katheryn Russell- Brown terms “racial hoaxes”) to distract police attention from their own criminal activity, to maintain control of White space, to retaliate against Black people for violating unspoken racial codes—or simply because they can. These cases are quite common: Russell-Brown documented sixty-seven such cases nationally just in the years between 1987 and 1996.”26 Furthermore, “such cases are so common, in fact, that one state, New Jersey, proposed legislation to apply a criminal penalty to someone who ‘knowingly provides false information to a law enforcement officer with purpose to implicate another because of race.’ (The law never passed.) Many remember the case of Susan Smith, who murdered her two children but sparked a manhunt for ‘a young black male.’ And seared in our nation’s racial collective memory is the Scottsboro case, where nine black boys were sentenced to death for the fabricated rape of two white women.”27.d e vre The irony is that while some European American adults find comfort in calling the police se r sth on innocent African Americans engaging in day-to-day activities, mass-casualty school g ir llA shootings facilitated by racist, murderous, hate-inspired European American teenage boys.sre h and young men continue unabated in the United States. As of May 2018, forty school silb u P kco shootings have taken place in the United States.28 Where is the outrage for these incidents tS & from European Americans—from the same European Americans who place bogus calls to fp iW.9 police on innocent African Americans simply living life? 1 0 2 © According to Mike Males, a senior researcher for the Center on Juvenile and Criminal th g iryp Justice in San Francisco, “White people should be more afraid of other whites than they are o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. of people of color.”29 Males explains, after examining statistics generated by the Centers for Disease Control, that “rates of homicides, gun killings and illicit-drug fatalities are highest in counties where nine in [ten] residents are white, and where President Trump won in the 2016 election.”30 Similarly, “the white Americans who are safest from such deaths are those who live in racially diverse areas such as Los Angeles, New York and Chicago, where two-thirds of residents are nonwhite, where millions of immigrants live, and where voters favored Hillary Clinton in 2016.”31 Males asserts that “whites are so much safer where there are fewer whites and Republicans, in fact, that it raises the question of what exactly underlies this strong correlation between white safety and voting patterns”; contrary to popular belief, “white Americans enjoyed the largest real income and employment gains of any race during President Obama’s administration, particularly in Rust Belt states, where federal economic stimulus was strongest.”32 Charity Starts at Home Liberal European Americans must challenge their own. First, these writers suggest that it is the responsibility of progressive European Americans to challenge their own cousins, aunts, uncles, mothers, fathers, sisters, and brothers who wrestle with biased, illogical paranoia. For quite some time now, liberals have been very comfortable consuming themselves with ministry to those on the margins. This ministry is easy compared to the harder, more treacherous task of confronting the pharaohs that resemble one’s own makeup, identity, and bloodline. This is why several liberal European Americans rush to do ministry in Third World countries rather than to confront the history and current state of racism in the United States. Second, some European Americans must ask themselves the why question. Why would one feel threatened after observing a Black female student sleeping in a dormitory common area? Is this feeling based on emotional reasoning or cognitive reasoning? If this feeling is based on emotional reasoning, how does one resist those feelings? Jason Johnson adds, “What needs to happen is people who make malicious prosecution calls on black people need to be fined. Look. If I pull a fire alarm at a school, and the fire truck has to show up, and it’s no fire, I’m going to get a ticket. I’m probably going to have to.d e vre go to court about it. If you call the police saying, I see a group of black people, and they’re se r sth jumping up and down and screaming—I don’t know if it’s Howard’s graduation or a riot— g ir llA.sre and the police show up and say it’s Howard’s graduation, then that person needs to be h silb ticketed. And I think if people started suffering consequences for this kind of behavior, you u P kco would see a drop in these kinds of phone calls.”33 tS & fp Last but not least, some European Americans must grapple with mission. What purpose iW.9 does one serve by contacting the police and reporting African Americans engaging in daily 1 0 2 © life activities? Some would argue that the mission of some European Americans is to instill th g iryp o control and dominance, and this is why 911 calls reporting nonthreatening African Americans C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.