This transvaluation of Christian values is what has sustained Black people through the horrors of slavery, lynching, and Jim Crow. Generations of Black mothers and fathers believed in their bones that the Christian faith of their White masters was from the antichrist. Illiterate in Western religion, victims of the transatlantic slave trade hewed from the horror of their a experience a faith that worked. Long before #BlackLivesMatter, they unearthed the hermeneutic of a Black Jesus in solidarity with their suffering. What White supremacy used for evil, they used for good. Spiritual care for Black people living with HIV and AIDS must include a theology of Black healing. This will involve a revolutionary reversal of what HIV and AIDS means in the lives of Black people. Advances in treatment on par with prevention options allow people who are HIV positive to live lives indistinguishable from the lives of people who are HIV negative. The rise of PrEP (Pre-exposure prophylaxis) in the gay community have brought about a sexual revolution that is allowing for serodiscordant sexual partners to engage in responsible sex without reservation. The opportunity for people with HIV and AIDS to live sexually fulfilling lives provides hope for healing from the stigma and shame of contracting HIV. Taken further, HIV and AIDS do not have to be wished away or invisibilized in order for positive people to fine joy. Black people have demonstrated the opportunity for healing amid suffering. The spiritual heritage of Black liberation has empowered Black people to persevere tragedy by experiencing embodied resurrection. The songs sung by Nina Simone and James Brown, the survival networks of Harriet Tubman and Marcus Garvey, the lived experiences of James Baldwin and Harry Belafonte have broken us free from the chains of a hereafter. Black healing for people living with HIV and AIDS involves finding joy and meaning in the dexterity of the disease shared with others who are positive. Black healing happens when Black people come together in the spirit of our ancestors, interpreting our HIV and AIDS infection out a history of suffering that has attended the Black experience. Black healing for Black people living with HIV and AIDS eliminates stigma in that it removes the chasm between Black people struggling to live with HIV and AIDS and black people who are just struggling to live. Black healing places HIV and AIDS in tandem with the heritage of Black power and Black liberation that is always on the march to dismantle White supremacy. Black healing for Black people living with HIV and AIDS tunes our ears, hearts, and minds to the soul-stirring tunes of the juke joint, to the liberative anthems of the.d e vre se Black freedom movement. Spiritual care for Black people living with HIV and AIDS r sth embraces those who died off in the early days of HIV and AIDS as ancestors in the freedom g ir llA.sre struggle alongside our Black iconic nobility, who died dreaming of the day when their Black h silb progeny would no longer experience the shame or fear of living with or dying of AIDS or u P kco HIV. tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th 141. Oxford Living Dictionaries: English, “Iconography.” g iryp o C 142. HIV.gov/ (website), “U.S. Statistics.” Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 143. Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), “HIV among Women.” 144. Black AIDS Institute, website. 145. Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), “AIDS among African Americans.” 146. Movement Advancement Project, LGBT Policy Spotlight: HIV Criminalization Laws. 147. Farrakhan, “Million Man March.” 148. Ibid. 149. Coates, “This Is How We Lost to the White Man.” 150. Ibid 151. Eph 6:5 (NRSV). 152. Cone, Black Theology of Liberation, 14. 153. Ibid., 5..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 12 When Life Doesn’t Seem Worth Living Congregations Engaged in Suicide Intervention and Prevention during the Era of the Black Lives Matter Movement D B D ELOIS ROWN- ANIELS During the era of the Black Lives Matter movement, an undertackled topic within congregations and ministries is suicide intervention and prevention. Suicide registers high among the taboo topics in churches and within society. The social stigma of suicide makes the topic among those that people would rather not talk about. People opt, albeit reluctantly, to risk suicide happening rather than to have it addressed. The Black Lives Matter movement has placed Black suicide within the national spotlight. The population most vulnerable to suicide is the African American transgender community, according to a survey sponsored by the National LGBTQ Task Force, in which percent of 49 the African American respondents who are members of the transgender community indicated that they had attempted suicide. Suicide within the overall Black community has garnered attention through the multifaceted platform of Black Lives Matter. The National Suicide and Black Church Conference along with the National Organization of People of Color against Suicide are two groups committed to addressing suicide within Black communities.154 A recent article by Justin Moyer in the Chicago Tribune registers the vulnerability to suicide for Black children under the age of eighteen. Moyer writes, “Nationwide, suicides among black children under 18 are up 71 percent in the past decade, rising from 86 in 2006 to 147 in 2016, the latest year such data is available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In that same period, the suicide rate among all children also increased, up 64 percent.”155 In 2015, 2,504 African Americans died by suicide in the United States: 2,023 males (80.79.d percent) and 481 females. As will be noted below, Black males commit suicide at a rate four e vre se times higher than the rate for Black females. There is clearly a crisis within the Black r sth g ir llA community in the United States. It is affecting Black men, Black children, and the Black.sre transgender individuals. The statistics related to suicide are staggering. For more than a h silb decade, suicide ranks among the top ten causes of death for all Americans, including African u P kco Americans. For children between the ages of ten and fourteen, it is the third leading cause of tS & fp death. For youth and young adults between fifteen and thirty-four it is the second leading iW.9 1 cause of death. Each year an estimated thirty-four thousand Americans commit suicide. One 0 2 © th million people in the United States attempt suicide every year. These numbers illustrate the g iryp o magnitude of this crisis that congregations and the society fear addressing.156 C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Suicide victims include Black celebrities such as the famous singers Donny Hathaway and Phyllis Hyman, and the TV host Don Cornelius of Soul Train. Among those who attempted suicide is Donna Summer, the popular singer. Summer’s autobiographical account of her own suicide attempt captures in words the inner struggles related to suicidal thoughts and plans. In a hotel room during a concert tour, Summer describes her being suddenly “overcome by an overwhelming sensation of profound despair and uselessness.” She names feeling “emotionally destitute” and as if her life was a lie and a fake. She desperately wanted to escape “this insanity.” She recalled: I had thoughts that kept repeating in my head, rolling like the TV screen, that I couldn’t turn off. I had failed God. I was worthless, I couldn’t be forgiven. I was doomed for hell. Believing I was without God made me feel truly and completely alone and utterly desperate. Those dark thoughts forced me out of bed. I walked over to the big, heavy window, threw it open, and hoped the weight of my loneliness would send me crashing eleven stories to the sidewalk below.157 Having plotted her suicide, she began to execute the plan by placing her right foot outside of the window. Her left foot “somehow got caught as the drapes bunched around the curved radiator pipes.” As she frantically tried “to shake the curtain” off her left leg, she found herself interrupted by the entry of the hotel maid into her room. Both Summer and the maid were stunned. Without either initially saying a word, the maid broke the silence by stammering: “Oh, Mrs. Summer, can I come in and clean your room now?”158 Being unexpectedly interrupted, Summer remembers: Flooded with shame, I was shocked back to reality. A rush of panic shot through my whole body, jolting me back to my senses. I knew I was in a bad place in my head, which God knew as well. But He’d put those drapes there for me to get caught on, providing enough time for Him to send in the maid to save me from jumping. In that instant my head began to spin. I was humbled... I needed to get medical help, real help.159.d e vre The Role of Congregations in Suicide Prevention se r sth g ir llA Congregations can assume a key role in confronting suicide. Research exists that indicates.sre that religion is among the positive factors within suicide intervention and prevention. In order h silb u for congregations to engage effectively in suicide intervention and prevention, church P kco members must learn and understand simple assessment tools, suicide warning signs, suicide tS & fp risk factors, recommended pastoral guidelines to help suicidal people, and how to make iW.9 1 referrals for suicidal people to mental healthcare professionals. 0 2 © th Once a congregation has been trained to intervene or prevent suicides, that congregation g iryp o must fashion a community in which suicide can be discussed in an open and informed C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. manner. A congregation must create a caring culture with communal norms of care that exhibit the best practices related to suicide intervention and prevention. It is important to clearly delineate the work of laypeople, clergy, and professionals trained in suicide intervention and prevention, whether a psychiatrist, clinical psychologist, social worker, pastoral counselor, or crisis counselor. Concepts and Definitions Key terms for this topic are suicidal thoughts, attempts, and completion, along with suicide warning signs, risk factors, intervention, and prevention. Suicidal thoughts happen, or suicidal ideation occurs when people contemplate suicide—from imagining what suicide is like to fantasizing how it would end their problems to coming up with ways at attempting it. A suicide attempt entails trying to commit suicide. Suicide completion is the committing of suicide. Suicide warnings are specific behaviors, such as journaling about suicide, that alert one to something unusual going on with an individual. Suicide risk points to identifying people as prime candidates for suicide attempts or for committing suicide itself, because their profiles include a number of risk factors. Suicide risk factors range from certain stressors to family history. Suicide intervention employs strategies to work with a person having attempted suicide or suicidal thoughts. Suicide prevention employs strategies that address in their early stages the plights of people having suicidal thoughts; suicide prevention also entails educating congregations, families, significant others, and individuals about suicide warning signs, suicide risk factors, and screening tools related to stopping suicides.160 Black Suicide Statistics 161 Table 1 Suicides by Black Males and Females per 100,000 African Americans YEAR BLACK MALE BLACK FEMALE 1970 8.0 2.6 1980 10.3 2.2 1989 12.2 2.4.d e vre se 1999 10.5 1.7 r sth g ir llA 2016 10.5 2.4.sre h silb For almost a half century, the Black male suicide rate has been over four times higher than u P kco the suicide rate of Black females. Since 1980, it has been consistently above ten per one tS & hundred thousand while the Black female suicide rate has been consistently below 2.5 and fp iW.9 during 1999 it registered below two per one hundred thousand. 1 0 2 © The differences in the suicide rates between Black males and Black females could possibly th g iryp be related to the “sisterhood” or strong social network that unites various sectors of Black o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. women, whether in the women’s auxiliaries of the congregations, sororities, fraternal orders, and women social clubs as well as fictive and actual kinship groups. Since veterans as a cohort have high suicide rates, and since a higher percentage of men are veterans, the unaddressed behavioral health challenges especially facing war veterans may account for part of the difference. The higher male to female ex-offender population may also be a contributing factor. Among these factors and others, the drastically lower percentage of men than women who belong to religious congregations may account for a higher suicide rate among men since religion has been identified as a preventive factor. 162 Table 2 Suicides Per 100,000 Black Males and Females Ages 24–44 Year Males Females 1989 20.5 3.8 1999 15.5 2.5 2014 15.0 3.0 Among Black men and women, the age cohort with the highest suicide rate is between the ages of twenty-four and forty-four. While the numbers are significantly above the male and female averages, there has been a noticeable decline in the rate among Black men by 25 percent between 1989 and 1999 and lesser decline between 1999 and 2014; yet there was a clear increase in suicides for this age cohort among Black females between 1999 and 2014. While the suicide completion rate among Black males runs higher than among Black females, the suicide attempt rate, among suicide survivors is higher for Black women than for Black men. Black women attempt suicide at a rate of 117 out of one hundred thousand whereas Black men attempt suicide at a rate of 77.6 out of one hundred thousand. Religion as a Positive Factor in Suicide Prevention Key research studies indicate that religion can play a positive role in suicide intervention and prevention. These studies distinguish between religious affiliation, participation, and doctrine in their findings: religious affiliation involves identifying with a faith tradition, religious.d e vre participation entails attending religious services (and practicing a spiritual discipline), and se r sth religious doctrine encompasses beliefs in God, life, and so forth. g ir llA These studies suggest religion may inhibit a person from acting on suicidal ideas by.sre h providing access to a supportive community, shaping a person’s beliefs about suicide, silb u P kco providing a source of hope, providing ways to interpret suffering. Additionally, I would argue tS & that religion provides positive reasons to live; it offers people purpose in life. fp iW These studies include people across races, nationalities, genders, sexual orientations, and.9 1 0 2 world religions. For instance, African Americans commit suicide at a lower rate than White © th g iryp Americans; the higher rate of religious affiliation and participation by African Americans o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. than by White Americans might serve as a positive factor preventing suicide. Men commit suicide more than women; possibly the lower rate of religious affiliation and participation among men might be a factor in the higher suicide rate among men. Consequently, White males make up the cohort with the highest suicide rate within the United States. Research shows that the highest suicide rates are among the “nones,” which are those who lack any religious affiliation.163 Regarding sexual orientation, one study “surveyed lesbian, gay, or bisexual adults... along with heterosexual matched controls... Those with a religious affiliation reported fewer suicide attempts than those with no religious affiliation; both in the whole sample... and in the lesbian, gay, or bisexual.” Marriage equality, according to one study, reduced teen suicide attempts among the LGBTQIA community. This Johns Hopkins University study linked the “legalization of same-sex marriage” to a marked “decrease in adolescent suicide.” Researchers compared data from “32 of the 35 states that legalized same-sex marriage between 2004 and 2015,” the year the Supreme Court ruled that same-sex marriage was constitutional. “The researchers found that suicide attempts by high school students decreased 7 percent in states after they passed laws to legalize same-sex marriage.” The study noted that “among LGB high school students” there was a 14 percent decrease in suicide attempts.164 In nuancing these findings, Robin Gearing and Dana Lizardi contend that research “also indicates that the relationship between religion and suicide risk is complex. Different religious affiliations provide different degrees of protection.” While religion functions as a preventive to suicide, each world religion offers a ranging degree of prevention related to their religious ways of believing, belonging, and behaving. Among world religions, the lowest suicide rate is among Muslims followed by Jews, Hindus, Roman Catholics and evangelical Protestants; mainline Protestants have the highest suicide rates among those affiliated with a world religion.165 To add further nuance to these findings, some studies indicate that certain religious expression within particular context can serve as a risk factor for suicide. The driving question is, why is religion sometimes associated with increased suicide risk? A few studies have identified patterns of ‘‘negative religious coping,’’ which may include “deferring all responsibility to God, feeling abandoned by God, blaming God for difficulties, experiencing spiritual tension or doubt, or experiencing conflict and struggle with.d e God.”166 vre se r sth Other studies focus the role that moral objections against suicide may play in deterring g ir llA suicide acceptability. They stress the “unique association” between moral and religious belief.sre against suicide and lower suicidal behavior. These studies often note that “the life-saving h silb u P beliefs associated with religious commitment may protect against suicide.” Consequently, kco tS low moral objectives increase suicidal acceptability. In this case, according to certain studies, & fp iW “individuals with low moral [objections] and religious objections to suicide are more likely.9 1 0 to have a lifetime history of suicide attempts.” Religious beliefs are central to these studies in 2 © th g serving as a “protective factor against suicide.”167 iryp o C Religious participation as it regards attendance at religious services can play a key role in Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. suicide prevention. In his book Religion and Suicide in the African-American Community, Dr. Kevin E. Early argues that congregations can create a “religiously based normative climate” and play a “crucial role in pulling together the social fabric of the black community.” The Black church, according to Early, crafts a religious “tradition shaped out of suffering”; this religious engagement of suffering has nurtured resiliency and supplied “strength, identity, coping skills, and a reason for living” to Black congregants and the Black community.168 Dr. Steven Stack in his study, “The Relationship Between Culture and Suicide: An Analysis of African Americans,” engages Early’s research. Stack distinguishes between religious beliefs and religious participation. He concludes that “only one indicator of religiosity (church attendance) significantly lowers suicide acceptability for both Black men and women.” According to Stack, then, African American congregations might play a vital role as networks of support, serving as a means of “emotional and other support.”169 Dr. James M. Shopshire, a Black sociologist of religion, contends that religion reduces “suicide by its collective function of fostering intensified relationships, strong social bonding, and shared values.” Quoting Brainbridge and Stark, Shopshire states: “Religion has the power to comfort people who otherwise would be plunged into depths of despair, power relevant for suicide.” He adds: “Religion provides a measure of hope and the feeling that once present sufferings are meaningful, compensating to some extent for the deprivations and difficulties experienced in the mundane world.” According to Shopshire, congregations need to understand themselves and act as part of a network to provide nurturing, caring, supporting ministries that transform, enable, and encourage persons from within for the missional activity of reaching out and caring. The congregations become centers for refuge and relief but also participant groups in the work of identifying and proclaiming the new possibilities and advocating and resourcing church-based and community-based ministries for those suicidally at risk or potentially at risk.170 Identifying Signs of Potential Suicide Victims: Assessment Tools Assessment tools aid congregations in identifying warning signs and risks factors associated with potential suicide victims. These assessment tools help identify whether someone needs to have a referral or immediate assistance..d e vre Dr. Donna Holland Barnes, an African American expert on suicide, identifies these three se r sth theoretical constructs to explain suicide: a sociological one, a psychological one, and a g ir llA medical (psychiatric) one. According to Barnes, the sociological framework offers what Dr..sre h silb James Shopshire called social reasons for suicidal acts. These social reasons focus on how u P kco the person fails to relate constructively to society. The psychological construct “uses negative tS & internalization—internal drives found in low esteem and an internal negative locus of control fp iW.9 —to explain suicidal thoughts and attempts.” The third construct, the medical or psychiatric 1 0 2 © model, interprets suicidal acts in terms of “mental illness.”171 th g iryp Dr. Alvin Poussaint, the renowned Black psychiatrist, in a book coauthored with Amy o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Alexander, a journalist, utilizes the list of suicide risk factors included in a 1999 surgeon general’s report of Dr. David Satcher, the eminent Black physician and public health administrator, employing Barnes’s distinctions. The sociological risk factors on Satcher’s and Poussaint’s lists include172 • barriers to accessing mental health treatment • relational (i.e., death or divorce), social, work, or financial loss • easy access to lethal weapons, especially guns • cultural and religious beliefs—for instance, the belief that suicide is a noble resolution of a personal dilemma • influence of significant people—family members, celebrities, peers—who have died by suicide, both through direct personal contact or inappropriate media representations • local epidemic of suicide that have a contagious influence • isolation, a feeling of being cut off from other people. The psychological risk factors include these • previous suicide attempt • family history of suicide, hopelessness, and impulsive or aggressive tendencies • unwillingness to seek help because of the stigma attached to mental and substance • abuse disorders, suicidal thoughts, or both The medical or psychiatric risk factors include these • physical illness • mental disorders, particularly mood disorders such as depression and bipolar (manic- depressive) • disorderco-occurring mental and alcohol and substance abuse disorders. These risk factors predispose a person to suicidal thoughts, attempts, or completed acts. In addition to risk factors are warning signs. Stacey Freedenthal identifies a list of warning signs that includes entertaining frequent, intense suicidal thoughts; talking or writing about suicide; making preparations for suicide; and suicide attempts or rehearsals.173 Within a congregation the clergy, parish nurses, or pastoral care teams trained in.d e vre caregiving might be taught how to pose particular questions as a preliminary conversation se r sth with people who exhibit warning signs or risk factors. Freedenthal and others suggest four g ir llA.sre key questions:174 h silb 1. How religious a person are you? u P kco 2. How do your religious beliefs help you to cope with stress, if at all? tS & fp iW 3. Are there ways that your religious beliefs or community add to your stress?.9 1 0 4. What does your religion say about suicide? Do you agree? 2 © th g iryp While the pastoral conversation or interview is meant to be brief, the aim of the four o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. questions is to determine the interviewee’s religiosity and how religion might be a resource in suicide prevention. The first question inquires about how the interviewee self-identifies in regards to religion and provides an opportunity for the interviewee to talk about the role of religion in her or his life. • How important is religion to this person? • To what degree does religion shape this person’s identity? • How often does this person engage in religious practices such as prayer, meditation, Scripture reading, and attending religious services? • How deeply does this person live out religious beliefs in behavior? While the question seems to anticipate an individualistic response, it is also inquiring about whether the person participates in a religious service; it also seeks to know whether religion is important in the lives of those in the person’s network of significant others, ranging from parents to other kin to the spouse or partner to friends; this network of significant others reenforces the religion within the individual. Since stressors are risk factors in people contemplating or attempting suicide, the second question seeks to get the interviewee to speak out loud about how religion has help them cope with stress in the past, if it has helped them at all. • During crises in the past, did religious practices, ideas, and services help them to persevere or cope? • Did a sermon inspire the person? • Did hearing certain religious music encourage the person? • Was there a particular pastor, deacon, or lay leader that the person found helpful when she or he talked or prayed with him or her? If the religious resources available to the person were not utilized, then a follow-up question might be, how could these resources possibly be of help? Realizing that religion in certain cases for particular people can contribute to suicidal thoughts, attempts, and completion, the third question explores this concern. • Does the religion foster within the person an unhealthy amount of guilt?.d e vre • Is the congregation an unforgiving community that undermines the person’s self-worth? se r sth • Do the interactions between people in the congregation and the individual increase the g ir llA person’s anxiety, adding to the person’s depression, and overall exacerbating the person’s.sre h silb emotional well-being? u P kco The responses to the question help the interviewer recognize that encouraging the person tS & fp to embrace the congregation wholeheartedly might possibly be counterproductive. iW.9 Since all world religions teach against suicide, the fourth question asks about the faith 1 0 2 © tradition’s teaching about suicide; yet it asks in an open way so that the interviewer does not th g iryp assume that the person’s particular faith tradition is actually against suicide. Assuming that it o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. is, then the interviewee gets to speak this out and to state whether they concur with this teaching. If a religion affirms life and living, then the religious person’s articulation of this belief can inform attitudes and behaviors. So even if the person has suicidal thoughts, she or he is less likely to act on those thoughts because of the religious sanction against suicide and the religious value placed on life and living. During the era of #BlackLivesMatter, these four key questions inquire about the religiosity of the suicidal person in order that the inquirer might have a sense to what degree religion might be a source of resilience, support, and life-affirming beliefs.175 Conclusion Suicide has received added attention as the Black Lives Matter movement focuses needed attention on issues and challenges that diminish the lives of African Americans. As the above discussion demonstrates, religion has played and can continue to play a vital role in empowering African Americans to access inner strength as well as social support within their faith communities to fight for justice. 154. Harrison-Quintana et al., Injustice at Every Turn. 155. Moyer, “Researchers Unclear Why Suicide Is Increasing,” para 7. 156. Thornton, “Reality of Suicide in the Black Community.” 157 Summer, Ordinary Girl, 137–38. 158. Summer, Ordinary Girl, 138. 159. Summer, Ordinary Girl, 138. 160 See Barnes, “Suicide,” 444–60. 161. Early, Religion and Suicide in the African-American Community, 12 for 1970, 1980, 1989; Curtin et al., 4–5, for 1999; National Institute of Mental Health, “Suicide” (esp. Figure 3) for 2016. 162 Spates and Slatton, “I’ve Got My Family and My Faith,” 1; also see Spates, What Don’t Kill Us Makes Us Stronger; and Borum, “African American Women’s Perceptions.” 163. See Barnes, “Suicide,” 444–60. 164. Segal, “Same-Sex Marriage Laws Linked to Fewer Youth Suicide Attempts”; also see Raifman et al., “Difference-in-.d Differences Analysis.” e vre se 165. Gearing and Lizardi, “Religion and Suicide,” 334–37. r sth g ir llA 166. Lawrence et al., “Religion as a Risk Factor.”.sre 167. Gearing and Lizardi, “Religion and Suicide,” 333. h silb u 168. Early, Religion and Suicide in the African-American Community, 1, 2, 44, 45. P kco tS 169. Stack, “Relationship between Culture and Suicide,” 253, 266. & fp iW 170. Shopshire, “Sociological Perspective,” 25, 28, 35..9 1 0 2 171. Barnes, “Suicide,” 445. © th g iryp 172. Poussaint and Alexander, Lay My Burden Down, 23. o C 173. Freedenthal, Helping the Suicidal Person, 90. Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 174. Ibid. 175. See American Psychiatric Association Foundation, and Mental Health and Faith Community Partnership Steering Committee, Mental Health:..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 13 #BlackHealthMatters Addressing Food Oppression in the Black Community D J B ANIELLE. UHURO “Do you want fries with that?” This simple question that McDonald’s workers ask patrons to convince them to purchase more has catapulted the $20 billion company now serving sixty- eight million customers a day, in 119 countries across more than thirty-five thousand franchises.176 What’s worse is the methods fast food companies will employ “to target kids from groups already more likely to suffer from obesity—including the poor, rural Americans and black Americans.”177 According to a new study by researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago and Arizona State University, fast food restaurants are more than 60 percent more likely to advertise to Black children in low-income communities, using popular movie-themed toys and kid-friendly gimmicks, rather than White children in upper-class neighborhoods.178 This disparity causes higher rates of obesity, high blood pressure, and diabetes among Black children as they grow into adulthood.179 As a result, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention asserts that while African Americans are making strides in becoming healthier, statistics show that chronic illnesses continue to remain high among African Americans compared to other ethnicities, in particular to White Americans.180 African Americans’ largest health Achilles heel is heart disease, followed by stroke and cancer, which all consistently result from systematic social factors: lack of home ownership, obesity, lack of exercise, poverty, smoking, inability to afford doctor visits, and unemployment.181 Of these factors, obesity is the most detrimental I reason because it specifically leads to a slew of chronic illnesses, including heart disease and stroke. I argue that African Americans living with chronic illnesses have three pastoral needs that a chaplain, clergyperson, or pastor can help to meet. First, I contend that African Americans.d e vre impacted by obesity, diabetes, heart disease, stroke, cancer, or combinations of these need se r sth ample and quality social support. According to the Journal of Health and Social Behavior, g ir llA persons living with chronic illnesses and limited to no social support have higher mortality.sre h rates.182 For example, according to the American Society on Aging, “an uplifting silb u P conversation that introduces hope and joy into the morning may influence physical activity, kco tS healthy food selection, or the choice to engage further in proactive social relationships later & fp iW in the day or week. Open communication with a physician may encourage stronger.9 1 0 2 engagement in answering health questions. A social service agency that provides volunteers © th g to maintain landscaping or home maintenance enables many older adults to live in long-term iryp o C neighborhood social networks. The range of examples is broad, and the individual variation Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. almost infinite.”183 I invite chaplains, clergy, and pastors to help hospital patients, parishioners, and community members reflect on their current social relationships by asking the following thought-provoking questions: • Do you live alone, or do you isolate yourself from others? • Do you have empathic, nonjudgmental support from biological family members or family of choice? • Do you spend ample time with your family? • Are you a part of a fraternity, sorority, Eastern Star chapter, masonic lodge, motorcycle/car club, and/or other social service organization? • Are you a part of an affirming, progressive community of faith? • Do you receive affordable and adequate resources from a particular social service organization? If persons are unable to answer these questions in the affirmative, pastoral care providers can help patients and parishioners process how to build these relationships; they should refrain of course from evangelizing, proselytizing, or leading one to a specific social organization, and should avoid conflicts of interests. Health disparities have become the new Jim Crow184 for African Americans. Furthermore, while they may desire to practice healthy nutritional strategies, most African Americans live in “food desserts,” implicating socioeconomic subjugation in what some are calling “food oppression.”185 The African American community must be willing to speak truth to power and ask the following questions: Where are the healthy produce markets in neighborhoods primarily African American and poor? Why is it that a bottle of filtered water costs more than a can of soda? Why is it that a salad costs more than a cheeseburger at a fast food chain? The prophetic call of pastoral care to communities of color, particularly in Black communities, pushes us to respond to the above questions. I extend a prophetic invitation for faith communities to establish health ministries open to all, especially to people outside the church in the wider community, that can foster proper nutrition and exercise. Imagine the infinite possibilities that could arise from faith communities partnering with local park districts and exercise facilities to offer free or.d e vre affordable exercise programming to persons living in low-income African American se r sth neighborhoods! Thus, I invite clergy to unite with local government, holding politicians g ir llA accountable to ensure that local park districts remain funded—whether by local, state, or.sre h silb national government agencies. I invite clergy to hold local government accountable for u P kco ensuring that markets selling healthy produce are created and developed in underserved tS & communities, and I urge clergy to oppose the development of new fast food vendors in these fp iW communities..9 1 0 2 © In addition to having social needs, persons with chronic illnesses have emotional needs. th g iryp When one is diagnosed with a chronic illness, sometimes feelings of shame, guilt, o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. depression, and sadness arise.186 Chaplains, pastors, and other clergy must help persons living with newly diagnosed chronic illnesses move toward hope. Pastoral caregivers can validate the feelings of those they help, can encourage patients or parishioners not to rush through the grieving process but to sit with their emotions. Those in the caring professions can help persons living with chronic illness to experience hope by encouraging these ten self- care interventions outlined by the South Gippsland, Australia, General Practice Alliance (a group ensuring that the voices of what we in the U.S. call primary-care physicians are heard in government and society):187 1. All or nothing thinking: You see things in black and white categories. If your performance falls short of “perfect,” you see yourself as a total failure. 2. Overgeneralization: You see a single negative event as a never-ending pattern of defeat. 3. Mental filter: You pick out a single negative detail and dwell on it exclusively so that your vision of all reality becomes darkened, like the drop of ink that discolors the entire beaker of water. 4. Disqualifying the positive: You reject positive experiences by insisting they ‘don’t count’ for some reason or other. In this way you can maintain a negative belief that is contradicted by our everyday experiences. 5. Jumping to conclusions: You make a negative interpretation even though there are no definite facts that convincingly support your conclusion. a) Mind Reading: You arbitrarily conclude that someone is reacting negatively to you, and you don’t bother to check this out. b) The Fortune Teller Error: you anticipate that things will turn out badly, and you feel convinced that your prediction is an already established fact. 6. Magnification (catastrophizing) or minimization: You exaggerate the importance of things (such as your mistake or someone else’s achievement), or you inappropriately shrink things until they appear tiny (your own desirable qualities or the other fellow’s imperfections). This is also called the “binocular trick.” 7. Emotional reasoning: You assume that your negative emotions necessarily reflect the way things are: “I feel it, therefore it must be true.” 8. “Should” statements: You try to motivate yourself with “shoulds” and “shouldn’ts,” as if you had to be whipped and punished before you could be expected to do anything..d “Musts” and “oughts” are also offenders. The emotional consequence is guilt. When you e vre se direct “should” statements toward others, you can feel anger, resentment and frustration. r sth g 9. Labeling and mislabeling: This is an extreme form or overgeneralization. Instead of ir llA.sre describing your error, you attach a negative label to yourself: “I’m a loser.” When h silb someone else’s behavior rubs you the wrong way, you attach a negative label to him: u P kco “He’s a pain in the neck.” Mislabeling involves describing an event with language that is tS & fp highly colored and emotionally loaded. iW.9 1 10. Personalization: You see yourself as the cause of some negative external event which in 0 2 © th fact you were not primarily responsible for. g iryp o C I extend a prophetic invitation to faith communities to implement mental health services Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.