leadership-by-hero models are inherently violent. Even when it is a woman taking the role of a man as leader-hero, this remains true. It is like a White person who is not racist because they “have many Black friends” (that is, their White friend slots have simply been swapped out for Black ones). The debate around appropriate representation and identity politics aside, the system remains soundly intact. This is not to say that churches shouldn’t have pastors. As full-time (if not always paid full-time) caregivers and resident theologians, pastors and chaplains serve in distinct and important roles inside the formation of faith communities. But the myth of the messiah (myth is not pejorative here)—that action and wisdom flow from the one to the masses—is linear. What Is Needed Is Circular Leadership Circular power formations delineate from Afro-indigenous traditions and the diaspora. Despite the framing of the movie Black Panther, which employs linear hero myths to fit a comic universe, the spaces to which today’s activists are accountable deploy rounded processes, to design a less comic and truly nonviolent Afro-futuristic world. They/We gather, heal, confront, share, learn, and—most significantly—decide in a circle. Sometimes this takes on the literal vision of a circle of leaders gathered in a room, but more significantly, circular power is defined by the ethos of a circle. Instead of power on top (hierarchy) or on the bottom (congregationalism), it is in the center, and all points of perimeter (locations of power, “leaders”) are equidistant to the center. Circular leadership is inclusive and participatory, intended to distribute power in an accessible and efficient manner. Some local chapters of #BlackLivesMatter may name a president, but this is almost always an artificial designation used to create accessibility for institutions that want to engage but find it hard to approach this model. Let us reconsider the palpable tension, called irony earlier in the chapter, in the relationship between church folk and activist folk: the Black Church—which gave birth to the civil rights iteration of this movement in the early twentieth century—is having great difficulty with this circular model of power. It is too unrestrained, too nebulous. Meanwhile, the activist collectives—Black Youth Project (BYP100), Let Us Breathe, and Assatta’s Daughters, among at least twenty others in Chicago alone—are having great difficulty abiding in traditional, male-centered, heteronormative models of power that have kept access.d e to the throne from those that don’t fit in these categories of acceptance. In the circular model, vre se r sth there is no throne. The head of the Black Life movement is plural, and potential leaders are g ir llA challenged not to think of the public implications of their private revelations, as if they are.sre coming from out of space and time, but are challenged to operate in space while intersecting h silb u within the space and experiences of others, within the space of violence and privilege. P kco tS Leading in the new, circular model requires a sensitivity to space, and to how much space & fp iW men in particular are taught to occupy without apology. It requires dealing with the insecurity.9 1 0 that naturally comes with having space and power taken from you; it is given freely in behalf 2 © th of the circle’s health. It requires trust: this is what we’ve been talking about all along. g iryp o C This iteration of the movement is younger, more affirming of sexuality, less restrictive of Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. gender, and decidedly more womanist in tone. For some churches and potential caregivers, it will appear painfully chaotic. But pastors and other clergy ought suspend judgment. Instead, a question to ask is, do our leadership structures make room for voices and faces that are rarely seen in more traditional settings, or do we reinforce the lifting up of “heroes”? A good homework assignment for any potential caregiver would be to invite one of the groups, leaders, or collectives that you are hoping to provide care for to one of your upcoming board, session, or council meetings. Invite them to observe and provide feedback on the flow of leadership and whether those most affected by injustice and violence might feel comfortable in that space. The lessons from this, if they can be received nondefensively, will go a long way toward establishing a loving relationship of mutual care. Next Steps If the Black Lives Matter movement is about confronting systems that oppress, this must now necessarily include the Christian church. If there is any hope for ministers to provide genuine spiritual care toward the wholeness and wellness of persons, then from within church walls there is going to have to be wholesale self-examination of the policies and practices that empower oppressive tactics and endanger people. Put another way, if churches (or mosques or synagogues or temples) are going to offer loving, safe spaces to gather and form community, they are going to have to confront their own complicity in violence and exclusion. We have offered a shift in language and a shift in leadership as two concrete ways to move forward, with questions and homework “challenges” to apply within your context in order to increase the capacity of the faith world to offer care to the activist world. The type of loving care and dynamic affirmation that church can offer would no doubt be useful to those who grow more weary as the tragedies pile up; the wisdom of ancient faith has much to teach us in these anxious times. But the movement has much to teach as well. For all the ways that religion has shaped the movement, let the movement teach now, and let the church be healed so it can teach anew..d e vre 52. See King, “Letter from Birmingham City Jail.” se r sth g 53. “What is violence?” (Google Dictionary search): https://tinyurl.com/y2gcr6uk/. ir llA.sre 54. Krug et al., eds., World Report on Violence and Health, 5. h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 5 Domestic Violence and Pastoral Care in the Age of #BlackLivesMatter S E D HARON LLIS AVIS In 2016 I had the opportunity to speak at the Conference on Crimes against Women (CCAW) in Dallas, Texas. The CCAW has been engaged, since 2005, in providing over ten thousand law enforcement officers, prosecutors, advocates, medical professionals, campus administrators, and others with best practices for responding to crimes against women. This conference draws over two thousand attenders from across North America to hear from the nation’s leading experts on domestic violence, sexual assault, campus safety, cybercrimes, stalking, culturally specific issues (affecting LGBT people, women of color, people of faith, and immigrants), investigation technology, and more.55 The overwhelming majority of attendees were White. My assignment was to conduct two workshops around culturally specific issues of sexual and domestic violence. The workshops conducted were titled “Race, Class, & Gender: The Impact of Gender Entrapment on African American Women,” and “Faith & Culture: Domestic Violence in African American Relationships.” The conference consists of a few days of workshops with one exception. Day of the 1 conference begins with an invited plenary keynote speaker to set the stage for the various workshops and dialogues to come. The keynote speaker on this day happened to be a White woman who was a domestic violence survivor. She spoke of her experience (all too familiar to survivors) as a domestic violence victim battered by her now-estranged husband. This story resembled my own story. It was a story of betrayal, shame, and physical and emotional abuse. It was a story of the manipulative tactics of the abuser; of the victim reaching out for help and support from family, friends, and professionals; and finally of the victim leaving the abusive relationship and picking up the pieces of a broken life. It was a story of reconciliation, recovery of self, resiliency, and restoration. I remember repeating an all-too-.d familiar refrain silently to myself, This is truly every survivor’s story. And yes, it was, up to a e vre se point. This story came to its conclusion as the speaker reflected on how wonderfully the r sth g police treated her, on how they followed up about her safety, on how they offered and gave ir llA.sre her rides to the police station, and overall on how the police cared greatly for her as a victim. h silb By the end of her speech I was greatly empathetic and grateful that she had not only survived u P kco such a horrific event but recovered and eventually thrived. Yet my refrain switched from This tS & fp is truly every survivors story, to That was not my experience with the police, or the iW.9 experience of the many African American women survivors for whom I had provided pastoral 1 0 2 © th care and advocacy. This refrain as well as the keynote speech shaped my introduction to the g iryp two workshops I conducted on these two days. Introducing the word particularities and its o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. meaning was key to establishing the themes of my presentations related to domestic violence in African American communities. The word particularities became real for me in the 1980s while I was in an abusive relationship with an African American police officer. This experience led me down the path to teaching a seminary course titled Domestic Violence in the African American Community. As a survivor of sexual and domestic violence, I found myself advocating for victims and serving on the board of directors for an agency tasked with preventing violence against women and supporting survivors. Most important, I was able to begin a ministry to victims of domestic violence within the local church setting. However, there was no experience more enlightening than being a survivor of domestic violence whose African American husband was, like myself, a police officer. Although I did not at this time have the scholarly knowledge to articulate the dynamics I experienced within the police department, and although I had no knowledge of the word particularities as it related to domestic violence, I unsuspectingly became a living example of how these particularities operated. I intuitively learned in the department about racism, sexism, gender bias, and the police code of silence. These -isms and gender roadblocks negatively influenced my ability to receive the help, safety, and support I needed. I learned how this male-dominated, chauvinistic, and military- style organization served as a source of protection for my abuser and permitted racist and biased behavior toward him as a Black male. I witnessed a system that shielded my abuser from being fulling accountable within a male-dominated system—a system that thus stifled my agency and limited my trust in a system that I believed would protect me. I learned the particularities that exist within a system of male privilege replete with racism and gender bias. As an African American battered woman survivor, I became energized by the imperative to bring into the classroom and into postdoctoral work information about violence against women. Consequently, I began teaching Domestic Violence in the African American Community in a local seminary. And, for the most part this class was fruitful for the African Americans who attended. However, it was in early 2000, when the course title was changed to Sexual and Domestic Violence and opened for all students, that I learned another valuable lesson. The class was designed to foster both a theoretical and a practical environment. Course topics included diagnosing the dynamics of violence against women, preventing sexual and.d e vre se domestic violence, and intervening effectively in situations of sexual or domestic violence. It r sth was during one of these classes when I asked a question about particularities. My question g ir llA.sre centered on African American batterers. It centered on the inclusion of the African American h silb history of oppression and its possible relationship to domestic violence. Focusing more on u P kco male batterers, I asked the class about their willingness to engage this topic. One young, self- tS & identified feminist in the classroom, who had been quiet for most of the conversations, gently fp iW.9 raised her hand and belted out an angry-sounding “No!” She went further with her comment 1 0 2 © and stated, “And that is my contribution to this class.” I was convinced at this moment that th g iryp not only were issues of race, class and gender ignored and devalued within the feminist o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. setting, but so were the lives and experiences of African American men and women, who lived with these dynamics and microaggressions daily. Their lived experiences didn’t seem to matter. Today, the phrase Black Lives Matter56 rings true for what I felt, and what I was experiencing the absence of in that classroom. My ambition became to read work by and about people of color and provide scholarship about them, as well as to include experiences from people of color (particularly from African American people) in my own preaching, lecturing, teaching, and training on issues of both sexual and domestic violence and pastoral care—especially in this age of #BlackLivesMatter. This chapter cannot and should not exhaust the various ways to provide pastoral care especially for African American victim-survivors. Yet, intertwined in this chapter are insights to these particularities and viable pastoral care practices that have been utilized to provide culturally sensitive responses to both the victim-survivor of domestic violence and the perpetrator of violence. The chapter also illustrates the need for advocacy, justice-making, and the prophetic voice—all as important forms of intervention and violence prevention in African American communities. Overall, this chapter will assert how the work of violence prevention and intervention has to be accomplished from the context of oppression. Prevention and intervention in various forms are needed to facilitate healing and restoration for the victim-survivor and accountability for the abuser. Addressing these issues is a great starting point for those who are serious about all Black lives, including the lives of Black women who are victims of sexual and domestic violence. This chapter will focus on two particular and important first steps of pastoral care—first, safety for the victim and accountability for the batterer; and, second, advocacy and doing justice. In my book Battered African American Women: A Study of Gender Entrapment, domestic violence, also known as intimate partner violence, is described as including sexual abuse, emotional abuse, spousal rape, and even economic abuse. It impacts all people but specifically women, children, LGBQT people, and teens.57 I suggest that the lack of response in the Black church to women’s being abused has its origin in the history of slavery, racism, and oppression in America. The necessary response to this oppression—Black liberation theologies and Black empowerment movements—focused more on Black men to the detriment of Black women.58 This lack of attention on Black women within the Black church and community ignored violence against Black women in intimate relationships and.d e minimized the availability of care for African American battered women, thus creating an vre se r sth environment of silence and increasing the possibility of the continued victimization and g ir llA traumatization of Black women. Yet, racism and the continued systemic oppressions suffered.sre by African American people must be better understood as we continue to examine more h silb u effective ways to be inclusive of Black women’s experiences and the particularities of P kco tS pastoral care needed for the prevention of and intervention to stop intimate partner violence & fp within Black families and communities. This is especially true if we are legitimately iW.9 1 concerned about keeping Black women safe, about holding batterers accountable, and about 0 2 © th doing justice for all within Black families and communities. g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Safety for the Victim, Accountability for the Batterer Safety for victims and accountability for batterers need to be examined together in order to understand their significance—especially given the need for African American battered women to seek out safe spaces, to report physical abuse to police, and to hold batterers accountable. African American women have often been stereotyped as strong women, as taking on the responsibility of caring for and fixing the brokenness within their families, even while experiencing abuse themselves. In and, a TV commercial advertising Enjoli perfume 1979 1980 featured a cover of the song “I’m a Woman.” The song makes the point that women are 1962 strong because they can meet both their partner’s needs (by frying his bacon or waxing his car) and their own without breaking a sweat. The commercial closed by calling Enjoli “the eight-hour perfume for your twenty-four-hour woman.” The image of the strong Black woman continues to be part of the culture accepted by Black women and promoted by Black men. The images and expectations of Black women are that they are to be superhumans. In her book Chain, Chain, Change: For Black Women in Abusive Relationships, author Evelyn White traces how the cultural history of Blacks in America has led Black women to place everybody’s needs before their own.59 White further states, “The images and expectations of black women are both super- and sub-human... This conflict has created many myths and stereotypes that cause confusion about our own identity and make us targets for abuse.”60 Black women, although suffering equally with Black men from the impact of slavery, lynching, Jim Crow, poverty, and so forth have not necessarily been factored into the equation of healing and liberation. In her book The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness, Michelle Alexander gives an excellent depiction of the criminal justice system and how drug laws that facilitated a war on drugs resulted in the mass incarceration of African American men, which resulted in their overrepresentation in prisons. In addition, she describes how these and other discriminatory laws and systems strip prisoners and ex-convicts of voting rights and of access to housing and employment. All this, she says, has contributed to a new kind of slavery.61 This slavery she describes as legal ways to further oppress African American men after slavery—hence her book’s title, The New Jim Crow. As it impacts African American women, Alexander states, “Women, in particular, express conflicted views about crime, because they love their sons, husbands, and partners.d e vre and understand their plight as current and future members of the racial undercaste. At the se r sth same time, though, they abhor gangs and the violence associated with inner-city life.”62 g ir llA.sre This same tension can be also applied to battered Black women—women who abhor the h silb violence they are experiencing. Yet Black women are not ignorant of these oppressive u P kco systems; they understand the impact of these systems on Black men and the Black family. tS & Consequently, Black women’s consciousness leaves them rightfully empathetic, sympathetic, fp iW.9 and protective of both the Black man and the Black family. Thus, it also leaves them 1 0 2 © conflicted in their loyalties and vulnerable to further abuse, and retraumatization. th g iryp Pastoral care with African American battered women must consider how the women’s o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. conflicted loyalties impact their safety and well-being. Pastoral care should seek ways to enable battered women to understand their right to be free from physical, emotional, and psychological harm, even to the extent of separating from the batterer and possibly spending time in jail. Pastoral care must be sensitive both to issues of racism and to the violation of African American battered women and their God-given right to safety. Evelyn White reminds us of this need. Loyalty, she states, “does not mean that you should continue to endure abuse from your partner.”63 She quotes the following poem by Pat Parker: Brother, I don’t want to hear about how my real enemy is the system, I’m no genius but I do know that system you hit me with is called a fist.64 In her book In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens: Womanist Prose, Alice Walker defines womanism in depth. Her definition is the basis for womanist theological practices. Key to this topic of safety is Walker’s description of womanism and women’s relationship to the other. She states, women are “committed to the survival and wholeness of entire people, male and female. Not a separatist except periodically, for health.”65 Womanist theological thought helps the pastoral care profession articulate theologically how Black women can be committed to family and can fight for justice within their communities while at the same time committing to their own safety, survival, and mental health. Statistically, • in women and in men experience severe intimate partner physical violence, intimate “1 4 1 9 partner contacts sexual violence, and/or intimate partner stalking with impacts such as injury, fearfulness, post-traumatic stress disorder, use of victim services, and contraction of sexually transmitted diseases.” • in women and in men have experienced some form of physical violence by an “1 3 1 4 intimate partner.” • in women and in men have been injured by an intimate partner.” “1 7 1 25 • in women have been raped by an intimate partner.” “1 10 • “Victims of intimate partner violence lose a total of million days of paid work each 8.0 year.”.d • % of all murder-suicides involve an intimate partner; 94% of the victims of these murder e “72 vre se suicides are female.” r sth g ir llA • “The cost of intimate partner violence exceeds $ 8.3 billion per year.”66.sre h silb These numbers underestimated of the problem, because many victims don’t report. Certainly u P kco these statistics align with Walker’s description of womanism in helping Black women make tS & critical decisions about their safety. She states, “Committed to the survival and wholeness of fp iW.9 entire people, male and female. Not a separatist, except periodically, for health.”67 1 0 2 © Safety also calls for developing relationships with local domestic violence shelters. th g iryp Shelters have often been known in Black religious circles as places that take away your o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. religion and encourage divorce. It is important for pastoral caregivers to dispel this myth and to establish relationships with shelters. Shelters have much to offer victim-survivors and their families in the ways of shelter, support groups, housing, and employment. The faith community can invite shelter personnel to visit the church and can share its resources for prevention and intervention, as the church and shelter develop trust for one another. Another important factor in safety is for the pastor and faith community to provide theological clarity. Theological clarity must empower the victim-survivor and hold the abuser accountable. Repentance, forgiveness, and divorce are three main issues I have discovered to be roadblocks to victim safety. On many occasions abusers will apologize for the battering, implying that the abuse must be immediately forgiven and reconciliation must be sought. Theological clarity helps the batterer and the victim-survivor understand that being sorry does not equal repentance. Repentance involves expressing contriteness, taking responsibility for the abusive action, and providing restitution. And if the victim-survivor is ready, repentance can also result in reconciliation. However, marriages do die, and some lines that abusers cross cannot be retraced. In those cases, divorce may occur. Pastoral care involves helping victim-survivors understand that divorce from an abuser has not broken the marriage covenant. Rather the violence of abuse broke the covenant. Oftentimes we in the church, quote Mal when speaking of God’s hatred for divorce. Yet we fail to pay attention to the 2:16 entire verse, which also states God’s hatred for violence. We must ask ourselves, as Dr. Frank Thomas often does, to what end and for what purposes do we privilege some passages of Scripture over others?68 The same goes for biblical passages on forgiveness. Forgiveness is often cited as the abused woman’s first obligation after undergoing abuse. When we encourage premature forgiveness, we are negating the process a victim-survivor must endure in order to make sense of the victimization; forgiveness is not the priority and may come in time but must never be encouraged until the victim-survivor is ready. When I teach courses or lecture on sexual and domestic violence, the issue of forgiveness always tends to elicit long, deep dialogue about the who’s, what’s, when’s, and how’s of forgiveness. Pastors and pastoral caregivers must provide this theological clarity to both the victim-survivor and the abuser. Biblical passages prohibiting divorce or enjoining forgiveness need to be revisited, deconstructed, and reconstructed so that they can serve as resources and not roadblocks to.d safety. e vre se Finally, accountability may include incarceration for the batterer. Unfortunately, often the r sth g only resource available for batterer accountability is the criminal justice System. When the ir llA.sre abuser enters this system and it becomes the option of choice for the victim-survivor, the h silb pastor and pastoral caregiver must support the victim. Supporting the victim involves being u P kco with her during her court visits. Traditionally in the Black Church leadership has supported tS & fp African American men through the court system. Caring for the batterer is okay as long as iW.9 his support includes him being held accountable (whatever that might look like) in the end. 1 0 2 © th However, it is vital that the victim-survivor not be alone in court, especially as the batterer is g iryp fully supported in this setting. We need more spaces for accountability within our o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. communities if we ever hope to avoid the criminal justice system. Accountability is also available in many areas within culturally specific domestic violence batterers groups that take into consideration the total history of oppression and that seek to make these connections with batterers in order to help break this cycle of violence.69 In addition, programs of restorative justice seek to decrease convictions and offer new possibilities for accountability and healing. The Black church could serve a tremendous service in this field. Yet, with all these programs for safety and accountability, our work is not over. Pastoral caregiving also entails providing advocacy and doing works of justice. Advocacy and Doing Justice The faith community can provide justice by holding the abuser accountable and providing for the victim-survivor. Key to caring for the victim-survivor is providing a safe place for disclosure, offering spiritual support, and hearing and believing the stories of victim- survivors, knowing that their stories are only the tip of the iceberg. However, advocacy as pastoral care also involves speaking out against domestic violence and having members of the faith community become professionally trained in proper advocacy. Advocacy also involves examining the churches organizational structure to ensure that Black women as well as Black men are in positions of leadership and are valued as equals within the faith community. These actions ensure that the faith community itself is leading by example in creating an environment of inclusivity and empowerment. And yet, there is even more work to do. Mic states, “He has told you, O mortal, what is good; / and what does the L require 6:8 ORD of you / but to do justice, and to love kindness, / and to walk humbly with your God?” (NRSV). This passage sums up our responsibility in the African American church and community. As a community that cares for the entire family, our responsibility does not end with caring for the victim’s safety and well-being or for the batterer’s accountability. We must undertake an ethical analysis of the treatment of Black women in history and the impact of such treatment on violence against women. Traci C. West, in her book Disruptive Christian Ethics: When Racism and Women’s Lives Mater, attempts to have a dialogue on this subject through combining theory and practice in her engagement. She tells stories of women to put practical meaning to her ethical considerations. She states, “My hope is that.d e vre this dialogical method of developing Christian social ethics will provide practice in how to se r sth conceive of what it means to share power rather than hoard it; how to make the g ir llA transformation of unjust, marginalizing conditions for women key criteria for evaluating.sre h society’s healthiness; and how to generate such commitments by Christian faith and silb u P practice.”70 kco tS & One great and necessary work of the Black church is to end marginalizing practices and fp iW conditions for women and commit to practicing equal justice from the inside out..9 1 0 2 In addition, we must continue the work of being a prophetic voice against systemic © th g iryp injustice, advocating for the rights of women, volunteering in domestic violence shelters, and o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. advocating for changing the laws and policies that impact mass incarceration, homelessness, and unemployment. These and many other issues in our communities represent important work that must be done. We are never fighting a single battle, and all the ills within our communities make up what is known as an intersectionality framework for a prophetic voice that seeks to be inclusive of the ways our communities and families are being destroyed both on the inside and on the outside. Conclusion: What Next? This chapter has attempted to introduce some ways to provide pastoral care to victim- survivors of domestic violence in the age of #BlackLivesMatter, and to provoke direct actions from pastoral caregivers. It is by no means a comprehensive pastoral care manual but seeks to give voice to the conditions of racism, sexism, gender biases, and the like that impact the safety and well-being of African American battered women. Issues of African American LGBQT persons are left out of this conversation. In my conversations with battered LGBQT persons, I learned that many of the issues they face are the same ones battered women face. However, as particularities are concerned, differences do need to be explored and researched. Although women are battered more than men, this does not mean that lesbians are not battered. And, when lesbians are battered, as pastoral caregivers we must consider their plight as people who live in a society rife with antigay bias. They fear being outed, and they are afraid of rejection by family and friends, including by their church family. As a faith community, the Black church must engage in self-examination of biased practices and misinformed Scripture interpretation, which has led to not only sexism but also to homophobia and damaging practices that leave the gay community vulnerable and isolated. As a faith community, we are not where we ought to be. Yet we are not where we used to be. I pray that a closer examination of ourselves and our practices will bring us closer to offering the kind of pastoral care to victims of domestic violence that is liberating and healing as well as replete with God’s kindness and justice for all people—regardless of their race, class, gender identification, or who they choose to love. This is our call to pastoral care in the age of #BlackLivesMatter. Let us learn it! Let us live it! “We are called to make justice, called to make it right. Called to do the Holy work of turning back the night. Called to investigate each shattered shaken soul. Called to make this.d e vre world, our world whole.71 se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb 55. Conference on Crimes against Women, website (http://www.conferencecaw.org). u P kco 56. Blacklivesmatter.com/—In 2013, three radical Black organizers, Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tometi, tS & created a Black-centered political will and movement building project called #BlackLivesMatter. It happened in response to fp iW the acquittal of Trayvon Martin’s murderer, George Zimmerman..9 1 0 2 57. Davis, Battered African American Women, 4. © th g iryp 58. Ibid., 5. o C 59. White, Chain, Chain, Change, 19. Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 60. Ibid., 16–17. 61. Alexander, New Jim Crow, 53–57. 62. Ibid., 204. 63. White, Chain, Chain, Change, 22. 64. Ibid. 65. Walker, “Preface,” xi. 66. These stats come from the website of the National Coalition against Domestic Violence: NCADV (website), “Statistics; National Statistics.” The NCADV website in turn relies on stats from Black, et al., National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Summary Report; Truman and Morgan, “Special Report: Nonfatal Domestic Violence”; Rothman et al., “How Employment Helps Female Victims”; and other sources. 67. Walker, “Preface,” xi. 68. Dr. Frank Thomas is a former pastor now serving as the Professor of Preaching at Christian Theological Seminary in Indianapolis, Indiana. I have listened to many of his sermons and this is a recurring theme in many of his sermons. It is so universal now that many people use it without any reference to a source. Yet, they will mention his name, indicating he was the original source, as most know it to be. Yet, this is said so much, it probably does not need attribution at all. I just love to offer it because of the authority of his voice. 69. African American Domestic Peace Project (website: http://www.aadpp.org/). 70. West, Disruptive Christian Ethics, xxi. 71. Author Unknown..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 6 See Her Creating a Culture of Safety in the Black Church for Young Women and Girls Living in a Prison Nation L S A IZ. LEXANDER The emotional, sexual, and psychological stereotyping of females begins when the doctor says,“It’s a girl.” —Shirley Chisholm, U.S. Congresswoman, New York 12th Congressional District Back then, Black churches were a small piece of peace. Church was a world where, even with its imperfections, the offer of equality and common humanity was the sustenance needed to make it through the rest of the week in a society that deemed [Black people] less than human. —Janelle Gray, author of Echoes of the Struggle Young women and girls are the fastest-growing population to enter the criminal and juvenile justice system in the United States. According to the White House Report “Advancing Equity on Women and Girls of Color,”72 girls and women between the ages of thirteen and twenty- four represent a growing share of arrests, delinquency petitions, detentions, and postadjudication placements in both the juvenile and criminal justice systems. Nationally, girls accounted for percent of all juvenile arrests in 1992; however, girls account for nearly 20 percent of arrests today. The numbers are even more staggering for girls of color, who are 30 disproportionately impacted by juvenile incarceration when compared to their White counterparts. African American girls, for example, compose roughly percent of the juvenile 33 justice system but make up only percent of the national population. In a newly released 14 report titled The Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline: The Girls’ Story,”73 this disproportionality.d e vre was found to be due not to an increase of criminal activity or violence among girls, but se r sth instead was due to “an aggressive enforcement of non-serious offenses that are rooted in the g ir llA experience of abuse and trauma” as well as racialized and gendered policies. In fact,.sre h silb incarcerated girls in general were found to overwhelmingly experience trauma, poor health, u P kco family conflict, and residential instability. Additionally, incarcerated girls overwhelmingly tS & reported experiencing significant levels of physical punishment, sexual abuse, and high fp iW.9 levels of psychological distress; higher percentages of abuse were reported by girls of color. 1 0 2 © In the 2005 study titled Detention Reform and Girls: Challenges and Solutions, published by th g iryp the Annie E. Casey Foundation,74 Francine T. Sherman reports an overreliance on the o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. juvenile justice system to deal with troubled and traumatized children. Simply put, girls are being criminalized for their victimization. Victimization and Incarceration I met Jay, a sixteen-year-old young woman, in 2016 while serving as the director of a project in New York City. My major responsibilities included overseeing the connection of formerly incarcerated youth to employment, housing, and educational resources. While working with Jay, I learned that she had entered foster care at the age of three. She did not disclose much about her mother, but she informed me that her father was in prison. At the time of our encounter, Jay had been in foster care the majority of her life, and since entering care she had been in twenty foster care placements before eventually being placed in a residential treatment center (RTC). An RTC group home is a specialized group home for children in foster care with psychological and behavioral disorders. I came to learn that Jay had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Jay also suffered from mild developmental and cognitive delay. This meant that although she was sixteen, she functioned as a twelve-year-old. Because of her delays, she had difficulty communicating and had poor self-regulation. This often made her a target for bullying by both youth and staff members at her group home, and as a result she would often have violent outbursts. At the time of our meeting, she had been committed to a psychiatric hospital twice and had been incarcerated six times. Unfortunately, for young women and girls involved in the criminal and juvenile justice systems, stories like Jay’s is not unique. In fact, also in 2016, fourteen-year-old Bresha Meadows made national news after she fatally shot her father while he was sleeping, in an act of self-defense. According to medical records, police reports, court documents, and testimonies from relatives and neighbors, Bresha and her family had endured years of physical, emotional, and mental abuse by him. In fact, just two months before the incident, Bresha had run away to her aunt’s house because her father had threatened to kill the whole family. According to Bresha’s aunt, a police officer who worked with victims of domestic violence, both the police department and child protective services were aware of the abuse but did little to help—all of which is said to have driven Bresha to take matters into her own hands. Bresha was charged with aggravated murder, and if convicted, was at risk of serving life behind bars. Fortunately for Bresha, she.d e received the support of major organizers who rallied for her to be viewed as a victim of vre se r sth domestic violence, and her case received national attention. Ultimately, as a result of the g ir llA national support, her sentence was reduced to juvenile involuntary manslaughter, and she was.sre sentenced to one year in juvenile detention, six months at a mental health facility, and two h silb u years of probation. She was released in 2018, and when she turns eighteen, her record will be P kco tS sealed and expunged. Jay and Bresha’s experiences reveal the prevalence of trauma as a & fp iW result of adverse childhood experiences as well as the reality of a victimization-to-prison.9 1 0 pipeline for vulnerable young women and girls. 2 © th g iryp o Trauma and Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACES) C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are stressful and traumatic events experienced during childhood and that lead to poor life outcomes. Further, a direct correlation has been found between ACEs and delinquent behaviors for justice-involved girls. Research has shown that the higher the ACEs score for children (scores range from 0 to 10), the greater their risk for chronic disease, mental illness, committing violence, and being victims of violence. Roughly percent of girls in the juvenile justice system had experienced five or more ACEs. When 45 compared to boys, girls have disproportionately reported having experienced complex and chronic trauma.75 Dr. Judith Herman, esteemed physiatrist, researcher, and teacher, describes trauma as experiences or situations that are emotionally painful and distressing, and that overwhelm one’s ability to cope, often leaving the person powerless. Trauma is typically outside the range of usual human experience. Complex trauma is exposure to multiple traumatic events. Consistent exposure to trauma has been found to literally change the shape and structure of the brain.76 Some behavioral indicators of trauma can include acting out (with aggression or anger), withdrawal, sleep disturbance or nightmares, mood disturbances, self-destructive behavior and antisocial behavior—to name a few. Given this, unfortunately, the criminal and juvenile justice systems have proven ill-equipped to address specific and unique needs of young women and girls who have experienced trauma. And because of this, the justice system becomes a revolving door for girls, ultimately creating a pipeline for incarceration within adult facilities. As a staunch advocate for justice-involved young women and girls, I have seen this firsthand. Two years ago, I was a member of an assessment team organized by the Women’s Justice Institute (WJI), which works to promote the decarceration of women and girls by bridging critical gaps between policy and practice and by promoting gender-specific and responsive services. Under a project sponsored by the U.S. Department of Justice and the National Institute of Corrections (NIC), the WJI had won a contract to conduct the Gender Informed Practice Assessment (GIPA) at the largest women’s prison in Illinois. As a member of the team, I was tasked with conducting interviews, focus groups, and surveys with correctional staff and inmates. During my time in this role, I visited a housing unit and met a young woman who, after expressing her grievances about the conditions of the prison, informed me that she had given the system fifteen years of her life. At the time, the woman was only twenty-nine years old..d e vre se Black Girls and the Prison Nation r sth g ir llA Dr. Beth E. Richie, author of Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence and America’s Prison.sre h Nation, argues that the investment in incarceration and divestment from the social safety net silb u P in the US, has been particularly harmful to Black women (and girls) in complex ways. When kco tS & women (and girls) are victims of violence and have records with law enforcement or social fp iW service systems, their risk of being penalized for nonnormative incidences increases. Ritchie.9 1 0 2 argues that Black women and girls are penalized because of the tactics used by conservative © th g iryp politicians, and because the women’s antiviolence movement addresses violence against o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. women exclusively through law enforcement, criminal justice legislation, and enforcement strategies. All this helps to create and sustain a prison nation. “Prison nation” metaphorically describes the state’s unwillingness to supply sufficient resources and opportunities to uplift vulnerable and economically depressed groups. As a result of this, the social agenda instead enforces law and order, reducing community and state protection for women and girls. For young women and girls living in a prison nation, the traumatic and unhealthy social environments in which many of them live result in behaviors that are criminalized or are mishandled—or both—by other systems. As a result, girls and young women enter the criminal and juvenile justice systems. Once they are there, misguided processes pull them deeper into systems not built to help, heal, or respond to their physical, developmental, emotional, psychological, spiritual needs—systems that often worsen their situations. Additionally, these systems are built on structural gender inequality and are particularly harsh on girls of color and LBQ/GNCT (lesbian, bisexual, questioning/gender-nonconforming, transgender) girls. These girls not only are unsafe in their homes but are also harmed by the systems. Richie argues that in a prison nation, social issues are addressed by criminalization, which has devastating consequences for Black women and girls overall and for survivors of violence more specifically. The Black Church as a Place of Safety Young women and girls living in a prison nation are in crisis. And they have fallen victim to punitive criminal and juvenile justice systems incapable of meeting their needs. Despite this, the plights of young women and girls have been largely left out of criminal and juvenile justice discourse. What can best address neglected girls and women in the juvenile and criminal justice systems is a multitiered program of support, grounded in prevention, intervention, and community-based diversion programs which provide trauma-informed and gender-responsive rehabilitative spaces. Girls also need access to spaces that provide physical, psychological, and spiritual safety. More than any other demographic, African American women participate in the Black church. Therefore they play a key role in the church’s functionality, longevity, and sustainability. Because of this, Black churches have a moral and ethical obligation to be places of respite, refuge, and solace for African American women and girls who are in need.d e of temporary relief, comfort, and safety. The Black church should create and promote a vre se r sth culture of safety that meets the physical, psychological, social, and spiritual needs of young g ir llA women and girls who are living in a prison nation..sre Pastors have a moral obligation to challenge and rethink traditional ways of doing h silb u theology in order to address contemporary issues. This will require pastors to critically P kco tS examine how young women and girls are affected by Christian doctrine. In order to meet the & fp iW spiritual needs of young women and girls who are suffering from the trauma of violence and.9 1 0 involvement in the criminal and juvenile justice systems, pastors must promote a culture of 2 © th safety in the Black church. Pastors must be grounded in the belief that God is concerned g iryp o C about the quality of life for young women and girls; pastors must reimagine atonement Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.