10 My Mind’s Made Up Barriers to Accessing Mental Health Services for the African American Community C H HARLENE ILL She walks into my office. She looks around. She settles into a chair. She waits. With a few questions from me she begins to share her story. She is like the kid first learning how to skate. But she is a natural, and I feel myself following her. She unfolds, sharing layers of her story and what brings her to my office. She wants to talk. She wants to unload her burden. She wants to be heard. She wants help. She wants resolution. Her story keeps spilling before me, natural and slow and coherent. I wish there were more time. I hate to cut her off. The hour is gone. She looks at me startled. And she asks what I have heard so many times: “So, Doc, am I crazy?” I would laugh except I can look in her eyes and tell she is serious. I instead censor my response. You are far from crazy. You are overdue for someone to hear your story. I look forward to working with you. There are real barriers to African Americans seeking out and accessing mental healthcare. In this chapter I would like to discuss a few of those barriers. Barrier #1—You Have to Be Crazy to See a Therapist There is a perception in the Black community that you have to be really sick to seek help. It follows that if you seek mental healthcare, something is really wrong with you that is observable by others and needs fixing. You go to a therapist only when you have metaphorically driven off the road and you are headed for a cliff. At the brink of disaster, then and only then can we excuse you for seeing a shrink. There is no other reason to see a.d e head doctor unless you clearly have big problems. By the time some have come to vre se r sth counseling, the problem is fairly complex, and there have been years of buildup. g ir llA Perception is very important to African Americans. I was once was at a sports game and I.sre saw these White men dressed up in crazy outfits. I said to a friend, a brother would never be h silb u caught in such an outfit. My friend responded, no a brother is much too cool for that outfit. P kco tS Because of our experience in America, image matters very much to African Americans. & fp iW African Americans spend lots of time on how they look and even the car they drive. We may.9 1 0 not have much else going for us, but we can look good. One client says her day is impacted 2 © th by how she dresses. g iryp o C The importance of image has been passed on to our youth. From my sessions with youth, I Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. know that the concept of cool is very important to African American young people. I see youth who get into physical altercations. When we unpack how they ended up fighting, it often involves not wanting to be perceived as a punk. If someone approaches you in such a way, for image you have to fight because you image is at stake. Being cool also impacts how often a child may speak up in class for fear of being perceived as not cool. So it is no wonder many do not seek counseling because of the stigma associated with counseling as something reserved exclusively for crazy people. However, seeking a mental health counselor is a form of self-care that allows one to see and hear one’s self in an unbiased space. Someone outside of you listens, able to see your blind spots, and provides feedback. I love to say counselors are the front seat passenger, empowering the client to drive his or her own future with some pushing and prodding and sometimes making suggestions. The world we live in is complicated and stressful, and whether you need someone for a few months or years, it’s okay. You don’t have to be crazy before venturing to seek help. Barrier #2—Our Faith Is Strong Enough to Heal Us of Anything One day a church member came to me and she was clearly in psychological pain. She has been diagnosed as bipolar, and she takes her medicine regularly. Because she is consistent and sees her psychiatrist quarterly, she lives a better life, and she knows it. She recalls life before medicine and her life now with medicine. But she had been talking to her friends, and they told her that if she had enough faith, she wouldn’t need medicine. Faith would heal her. They challenged her to try and trust God. She was already trying and trusting God, but they equated faith with not needing medicine. So she came to me asking for some way to fight back in a fight in which she had been defeated. Her question was more a plea than a question as she asked, do I have to stop taking my medicine? I encouraged her to stay on her medicine and to see God as giving her the knowledge to alleviate her struggles with the support of medicine. I affirmed that she was faithful, and that she had a chemical imbalance that warranted medical assistance. A few years ago I heard a gospel artist share the healing story of her sister. She had a sister who needed glasses. Her eyesight was relatively poor, and so her sister’s lenses were very thick. During one revival a preacher visited who claimed to have the gift of healing people.d e with vision challenges. He announced his gift and instructed those who wanted to be healed vre se r sth to get in line. It seemed like a good time for this gospel artist’s sister to get in line. He also g ir llA collected their corrective ware because they would not be needing it after their healing. The.sre preacher went through laying hands on each person in the line. When it was all over, the h silb u family of the nearly blind girl watched as she groped around trying to find her way back to P kco tS her seat. When service was over, the mother of the girl told her to go get her glasses. & fp iW In some of our spiritual understandings is a belief that God can heal one instantaneously..9 1 0 In the gospel are references to God healing people because they had faith. If one can only 2 © th have enough faith, then one can be healed. But it is a deep misunderstanding to attach healing g iryp o C solely to faith because it implies that those who are not healed do not have enough faith. I Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. have ministered to people who have felt deeply hurt because they somehow blamed themselves for their own mental struggles. Clearly instances of miraculous healings do happen. These are often exceptions and not the norms. There are instances where someone with stage 4 cancer is healed. These stories encourage our faith. And we embrace these stories. But this notion that healing happens at the command of one person whenever the person chooses to use it has been harmful to the church. It has been used to leave people with physical and mental challenges crippled. We need to hear all stories as we garnish wisdom. Imagine that for every miracle story there are one hundred regular stories. It could be your story. Stories of people who need time to unfold, share, and slowly recover. Stories of people who have experienced unimaginable horrors that send them running. Stories of people who with faith can look back like the Sankofa bird to really be able to look forward to all the future holds for them. Barrier #3—The Strong Black Race I grew up hearing and seeing that my grandmother was a strong Black woman. She was a Thornton lady. She was the only daughter and youngest among nine children. She had had two husbands and I daresay some other men. Way before my time, I heard, she’s been in a few fights but only in defense. She always had a penny, and she raised her four daughters and worked full time. I could go on and on about my grandmother, but mostly I want to say she was the epitome of a strong Black woman. She once said to me, your generation makes so much more money than I ever had and you have nothing to show for it. She had no luxuries, and she came out more than okay. For African Americans, if being strong means you don’t need counseling, than inherently we are implying that mental healthcare is for weak people. It is for the crazy people. It is for those who have been to war or raped. It is for those who have had really extreme experiences. But it is not for us who are the product of centuries of slavery, racism, oppression, and all kinds of evil heaped on, that was built into the foundation of America. I remember one client explaining she almost lost her baby. She had been raised to act like a proper woman. So when she was ready to deliver her baby, she conducted herself as a proper woman. During the childbirth she was in immense pain, but she refused to scream. When she finally did start screaming, they realized that something was wrong. The doctor.d e ended up giving her a C-section. Later, the doctor explained that if she had expressed her vre se r sth pain sooner, they would have known something was wrong sooner. g ir llA This lady’s experience reminds me of how we have put obstacles between us and our.sre mental health. We equate being strong with not showing vulnerability. I recall peers often h silb u saying, “That’s what White women do.” There was almost a sense of superiority that we P kco tS could endure way more than our weak counterparts. We knew we were not White women, & fp iW and we were much stronger. We should not cry. We should not wear our feelings on our.9 1 0 sleeves or recognize that we are the lady on the table refusing to hollah. I have worked with 2 © th countless African Americans who cannot cry because very early on they were given the g iryp o C message that the crying was not okay and is what weak people do. Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Without taking anything away from our ancestors and what they had to do in their context, for African Americans today It takes incredible strength to talk about our experience in America. It takes incredible strength to bare one’s soul to another. It takes incredible strength. to pause and examine one’s life. I think Marvin Gaye was on to something in his “Inner City Blues.” There he sings that life makes him want to holler. “This ain’t living,” he sings, describing the world that is given to African Americans. The way I see it, if anybody should see a therapist, it’s Black people. Barrier #4—You Can’t Let Your Left Hand Know What Your Right Hand Is Doing I grew up with my mother using a lot of idioms, most of which I did not understand. But like parents who buy their children’s clothing one size bigger to increase longevity, I grew into an understanding with time and age. There was this sense in my family that your business should be guarded, and to be careful who you shared pertinent information about yourself. There was a real distrust of anyone who wasn’t family. Because of our history, Blacks are often suspicious of Whites. And with the current Republican administration and public display of racist overtures, those sentiments of “us and them” and “they cannot be trusted” lurk like a demons constantly whispering in our ears. No matter how friendly and kind they are, there is a suspicion about their motives. And since the face of healthcare and mental healthcare is White, like the face of poverty is Black, there is a distrust of them. What will they do with my information? Could this come back to bite me in the face? What do they know about my struggles? What good is their book knowledge going to do me? Half of them are crazy. They can’t tell me what to do; they don’t have a clue. I been doing okay thus far; why talk about it now? Talking doesn’t change anything. There is a real distrust of the other in the Black community. For many years the pastor was that one trusted person, and even s/he has come under scrutiny. For Black people, trust is important and is gained through relationship. In our history people knew your people, and that said something about you. My grandmother was a Thornton, and those were strong people. My mother can go anywhere, and once she says my grandmother’s name, it opens doors. Relationships are the bridge to trust among African Americans, and a counselor or outsider is perceived as a stranger and not worthy of sharing my personal business..d e vre Furthermore, history has plenty of examples that provide a lens to why Blacks are se r sth distrustful and suspicious of others, especially of Whites and White institutions. For example, g ir llA in the medical world we have not always been treated well. Famous studies include the.sre h Tuskegee syphilis experiment, conducted from 1932 until 1972. The purpose was to observe silb u P the natural progression of untreated syphilis in rural Alabama under the guise of providing kco tS free medical care to African American men. The 622 Black men were told the study was & fp iW going to last six months, but it lasted forty years. After funding was lost, these Black men.9 1 0 2 were never told that they were not being treated. The men infected with the disease were © th g never told they had the disease, and none was treated with penicillin, even after the drug was iryp o C found to be successful in treating syphilis. Instead they were told they were being treated for Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. “bad blood,” a catchall term for various medical conditions, including syphilis.137 As recently as 2010, the nonfiction book The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks is another example of the medical field’s treatment of Black people. Henrietta Lacks’s cells were used for research and commercial purposes unbeknownst to her family. While the medical field heralded that consent was not needed to use these cells, her cells had been used all over the world, gaining a notoriety, without her family knowing. Lacks’s cells were unique: they could be kept alive because they kept dividing. Up until then cells died within a few days. But her cells could divide multiple times without dying—hence the phrase “the immortal cells.” The cells remaining alive allowed biomedical research breakthroughs including the polio vaccine. In the ‘70s, many of her cells became contaminated, so the family was sought out to supply additional cells, but still no mention was made to her family that her cells had been used. Such occurrences in history have made African Americans suspicious of the other. We know that discrimination literally kills. We know that they don’t really care about us. Just two years ago Ethel Easter in Houston, Texas, didn’t like how her doctor was treating her and put a recorder in her hair. Later when she listened to the recording, she heard the staff making lewd comments about her. And so, African Americans are understandably suspect about who they can trust. In order for African Americans to place trust in someone, that person will need to have been inspected as if under a microscope. How often race has impacted the quality of care we receive sends chills throughout our communities. Therefore African Americans may well say that healthcare (including mental healthcare) doesn’t work, or that medical professionals can’t tell them something they don’t already know. I remember my graduate education. I could sense a large gap between my privileged classmates and me. There was so much I did not know. I found myself needing tutorial help with one of my classes. I wasn’t even swimming but taking in large gulps of water. While White students gladly were getting tutoring, for me tutoring was for dummies. And so I never sought out tutoring. In graduate school, a Black, upwardly mobile professional woman observed I could use some tutoring and reached out to help me. Actually she insisted. So I did get to feel stupid. And for many Sundays, at Mrs. Loeseth’s insistence, I showed up at her home. I did not want her help, but she insisted on giving it. In graduate school, I could see that my peers had been exposed to a world I didn’t even.d know existed. They were confident and sure of themselves while I was just honored to have e vre se made it in. They were asked their opinions and exercised their voices early on while I was r sth g taught to be quiet in the presence of adults and to speak when addressed. But in graduate ir llA.sre school there was a whole new mode of operation for which I was not prepared. I knew that h silb my peers had more even if I could not articulate what was that more. And I knew how hard it u P kco was to ask for help because it said something about me. tS & fp I learned in graduate school there is much I do not know, and it’s okay to not know, but it’s iW.9 not okay to do nothing about what you do not know. Jesse Jackson says it well: “Democracy 1 0 2 © th does not guarantee that all of us can dunk the ball. It guarantees all those can have the right to g iryp dribble. It assumes an even floor, an even playing field. And today, that even playing field is o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. not there.”138 The truth is the playing field is not equal, through no fault of our own. Early on Blacks and White are socialized differently about the world and our space in the world. I was an above-average student, and I was experiencing the impact of race on my upbringing, which left me trying to catch up on the playing field. When people have been put down in a society and devalued and described negatively, their egos are fragile, and many experiences they have may be perceived as slights against themselves; these slights are often real and sometimes perceived. African Americans are too busy to ask for help—too busy trying to survive and keeping up their guards in a racially hostile context. Among African Americans, asking for help—mental help, academic help, or any kind of help—is seen as weak and reflects negatively on the person seeking help. It would take me a decade to begin to shift my own understanding of help when I pursued another graduate degree, which yielded a much more positive experience. Asking for help was no longer a sign of weakness to me but a sign of strength. I was shocked when another White student shared with me and said that I asked the questions she was afraid to ask. I transformed from being the quiet kid to insisting I be heard. I wanted to learn, and I knew not knowing had nothing to do with my intellectual capabilities. While there are many barriers to African Americans’ receiving mental healthcare, more and more are seeking out help. Ironically, in this present Trump era, with despair encroaching, we are more in need of therapeutic spaces. The real irony is that if anybody needs the gentle presence of an empathic listener sage, it is Black people. African Americans were taken from their native land and treated horrifically both in America and in the Caribbean. They were packed on boats like sardines and let up for air after days of being chained underneath. When they were very sick, their bodies were tossed in the ocean; others willingly jumped overboard. Once on dry land they were improperly clothed, groped, and placed on auction blocks to be sold. The institution of slavery continued to get worse, mutating, over the generations. African Americans were robbed of their culture and treated as less than human beings. We were taken against our wills, we were put in inhumane conditions, we were stripped of any say-so over our bodies and our lives, we had our children taken from us, and we were whipped for any insubordination. If we showed any self-agency, we received physical punishments—including but not limited to having body parts cut off, experiencing whippings, and being left for dead. We were raped and made available to the.d whims of masters, their wives, and their children. We were sold and moved to suit the e vre se economic pursuits of slave owners. We were forbidden to be educated and taught an r sth g oppressive rendition of the Bible that rendered us helpless and dependent. Even after slavery, ir llA.sre the Deep South and other places enforced enslaving systems and practices with different h silb names. Black bodies were lynched on false allegations. Plantations continued, and the system u P kco kept us in debt. There were cross burnings in response to miraculous Black economic growth tS & fp or to assertions of Black agency against all odds. Jim Crow and segregation along with iW.9 violence and fear worked hard to keep Black people in our place. All the way up to today we 1 0 2 © th have seen and are seeing Black bodies killed by Black hands and by police hands, and we are g iryp not hearing an outcry o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. The criminal system and the lack of a good lawyer lead to our men serving time beyond the crime and finding guilt in the face of innocence. Gaps are growing wider between those that have and those who do not—gaps in healthcare, education, economics, and access to services. And we have by no means recovered from all that was done to our people. We need our stories—our laughter, our pain, and our tears—to be heard. In the novel The Salt Eaters, by Toni Cade Bambara, the protagonist asks, “Are you sure, sweetheart, that you want to be well?” of a woman who has tried to commit suicide.139 The healer is trying to help the woman, who was once on the ledge and fell off. An underlying sentiment in the healer’s question is that not everyone wants to be well. Not everyone wants to be well. Or maybe a more gentle truth is, not everyone is willing to do the work that will make themselves well. Wellness requires something of the person that wants it. For one, you have to let go some of the myths that surround seeking mental healthcare. You have to work at and invest time into maintaining mental health. You have to desperately want wellness enough that you are even willing to let others help, no matter how awkward you feel. Letting someone in requires incredible strength. Toni Cade Bambara goes on to say “There is a lot of weight to being well.”140 There are some good mental health workers that can help you better navigate your wellness journey. We are psychologically struggling to breathe amd the social calamity and enormity of being Black in America. We are containers of deep trauma and pain. We need trained professionals to hold our stuff. We need careful hands to prod and journey with us. We need to begin the hard work of resisting medicating ourselves with shopping, gambling, drinking, and other addictive behaviors: we need to stop walking down dead-end roads. We often look good on the outside, but it’s important to address our internal well-being and to answer the question, do we want to be well? If you yearn for hope, healing, and health, then make up your mind to reach beyond yourself. Mental health professionals do know something that you do not know. You just have to find the right one for you. There are counselors who look like us, who understand us, who have good hearts and capable hands and seasoned ears. With quality mental health professionals, we can cover old ground and make new maps and plot new mental health territories for our next generation..d e vre 137. See Wikipedia, “Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment.” se r sth 138. Jackson, interview by Henry Louis Gates Jr., on “The Two Nations of Black America.” g ir llA.sre 139. Bambara, Salt Eaters, 3. h silb 140. Bambara, Salt Eaters, 5. u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 11 Give Us What Magic Johnson Got! Spiritual Care for Black Lives Living with HIV and AIDS in the Era of #BlackLivesMatter M J C ICHAEL. RUMPLER I must admit, I barely knew Magic Johnson before 1991. But, nevertheless I felt the full weight of his sobering HIV disclosure as if it were my own. I remember knowing it was a big deal, but not fully knowing why. How had he gotten it? He must be gay, right? I pretended not to care, lest in my curiosity my own closeted truth become disclosed. As he stood there next to his wife, blinded by the flashing camera lights, naked before the entire world, I felt what he felt. Magic Johnson’s reality made it real not just for me, but for everyone. It was no longer a gay disease, a prostitute’s disease, a junkie’s disease, or Africa’s disease. It was now our disease as we witnessed a Black, successful celebrity athlete, admired and respected by all, living our worst nightmare in public guise. If Magic could get it, any of us could get it. If any of us could get it, then I knew that I certainly would get it. Fifteen years later, when I did get it, my dad comforted my mom by reassuring her that I would live a long healthy life because, “See! Look at Magic Johnson.” Those words provided quite enough hope to get her through that day. #BlackAndGay and HIV Positive What Was Then Iconography is alive and well among Black folk. Living, breathing iconography has always played a vital role in the Black American experience. If iconography is “the visual images and symbols used in a work of art or the study or interpretation of these,” the black.d e experience in America is to be understood as a succession of icons who overcame the vre se r sth shackles of White supremacy.141 We love our heroes. We need our heroes. From Frederick g ir llA Douglass and W. E. B. Du åBois to Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X, from Jesse.sre Jackson to Jesse Owens, from Hank Aaron to Mohammed Ali to Barack Obama, these are h silb u P the visual images and symbols of Black hope for a future yet to be fulfilled for generations of kco tS Black people. The road to Black liberation and empowerment has been pioneered through the & fp iW lenses of the trials, tragedies, and triumphs of American Black nobility. The life and legacy.9 1 0 of Magic Johnson is no minor contender among such icons. 2 © th Back then, as a Black, gay seventeen-year-old, I had never seen anyone who looked like I g iryp o C felt. I was completely void of any vision of who I might become or what I might experience Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. in a world in which my life seemed destined for disdain. But when Magic came out as HIV positive, in one fell swoop I gained an unlikely role model. The shame on his face and the shock on everyone else’s was the first marker of what life might be like on the day that my positive diagnosis would be revealed. Would my family stand in solidarity? Would my sexual transgressions be consumed by insatiable skeptics? Would my peers shudder in disgust? As it went with Magic, might it go with me? This Is Now Interestingly, as it went with Magic, so it did not go with me. The failure of Black iconography is that our lives rarely reflect the lives of our idols. Every year thousands of young Black men leave the ball court in despair, having fallen short of NBA stardom. Every season, America’s aspiring top models fall too short of Tyra’s ultimate top-model stature. Likewise, many Blacks diagnosed with HIV rarely achieve the health of Magic Johnson. The consolation that Dad shared with Mom was of no comfort to me. Sure, I was relieved that Magic’s story was enough to stave off the questions she had for me. But I knew that I was no millionaire. I knew that I was not married with children. I knew that I had no superstardom to mask the realities of being HIV positive. As time passed, it was as if the threat of AIDS on Magic’s life evaporated. Fifteen years later, after the epic advances in the field of HIV and AIDS, when I received my diagnosis, Magic’s story was farthest from my mind, and death was my only hope as I sat gazing through the clinic window. HIV and AIDS Basics for Black Lives by the Numbers Nearly thirty years after the Magic press conference, more than 1.1 million Americans are living with HIV, and 1 in 7 do not know it. In 2016, 39,784 people were diagnosed with HIV. Black gay and bisexual men are the most affected.142 Of the twenty-six thousand annual infections among all gay and bisexual men in recent years, ten thousand affect black gay and bisexual men. That is, 38 percent of new infections among gay and bisexual men affect Black men. While HIV infection has decreased among White and Latino gay and bisexual men by 10 percent and 14 percent respectively, infections have increased by 4 percent for Black gay men..d e vre HIV Diagnoses in the United States for the Most-Affected Subpopulations, 2016143 se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Black men who have sex with men are not the only story here. Black heterosexual women might contend that HIV and AIDS is no longer a gay disease as 72 percent of women living with HIV are Black.144 In 2016, Blacks overall represented 12 percent of the U.S. population but accounted for 47 percent of HIV diagnoses. In 2014, African Americans make up 43 percent of all people living with HIV in the United States. In 2015, Blacks accounted for 52 percent of those who died from complications related to HIV.145 These numbers reveal that #BlackLivesMatter extends far beyond racialized policing. Or does it? Black and Positive and Criminal The greatest threat to Black people living with HIV and AIDS in the United States is HIV criminalization. Any conversation involving the matterment of Black lives must include the disproportionate rate at which Black men are jailed for living while HIV positive. Thirty- eight states have laws that could criminally prosecute people living with HIV and AIDS. These laws penalize those living with HIV who willfully transmit HIV or who fail to disclose their HIV diagnosis before sexual intercourse, and these laws originated long before HIV and AIDS were considered treatable, manageable illnesses. The penalty for infraction is up to thirty-five years’ imprisonment and registration as a sex offender.146 Due to the lack of education about HIV and AIDS and the overwhelming stigma surrounding them, fear sustains such laws and places Black people at compounded risk in that we are already the.d e most vulnerable to be harmed by HIV and mass incarceration. vre se r sth Just as it came as no surprise to Black people that the Black dead body of Michael Brown g ir llA lay bleeding in the middle of Canfield Drive for four hours, neither should it come as no.sre surprise that nearly half of all bodies infected by HIV and AIDS in the United States are h silb u Black. In a White supremacist construct, it is well established that those living while Black P kco tS are impacted tenfold by nearly every social ill than our White counterparts. Whether the & fp iW malady is heart disease, infant mortality, or median income, the statistics prove that Black.9 1 0 lives matter less than White lives. The compounded oppressions of mass incarceration and 2 © th being HIV positive reveal the inhumanity of criminalizing HIV, especially during the dawn of g iryp o prevention and treatment methods that greatly reduce the probability of transmission. C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. #BlackHIVPositiveLivesMatterToo Since 2014, racial bias in policing has become common kitchen table conversation. After the many marches, rallies, and protests that have followed Sanford, Florida; Ferguson, Missouri; Staten Island; Cleveland; Charleston; Baltimore; Baton Rouge; Charlotte; Minneapolis; and Waller County, Texas, we have become accustomed to what to do when a Black body falls victim to state-sanctioned White violence. Despite the repeated exonerations, we know that police officers are rarely held to account for fear for their lives when encountering unarmed black men. Yet, we have become accustomed to tweeting, posting, looting, rallying, and marching whenever an unarmed Black body is slain by state-sanctioned violence. Conversely, we are not as astute when Black lives are assaulted by a system that ignores the impacts of HIV and AIDS in Black communities. Our protests and our rallies become strangely muzzled when faced with the problem of HIV and AIDS for Black people—which begs the question, why do black people tolerate disproportionate Black HIV and AIDS infections in the age of #BlackLivesMatter? The Triple Threat—HIV and AIDS and Black Stigma—We Are Killing Us Truth be told, compared to most of the social ills that plague Black bodies, racialized murder by police is somewhat of a soft pitch. Even among Black people there is a slowness to rise up in protest of our victimization. It was not until I was convinced that Trayvon, Michael, Eric, or Sandra were unarmed with hands raised that I felt justified to rally in their defense. White policemen executing unarmed Black folks pleading, kneeling, running for their lives ought be an easy argument in the case against Black lives. But when it comes to the sexual proclivities of those same Black bodies, Black people are much less likely to join the movement for Black viability. Faced with the legacy of lynchings, mass incarceration, and disproportionate rates of poverty, Black people find it difficult to confront systemic social ills that plague our communities. It is easy for us to blame ourselves for being in the wrong place at the wrong time, surrendering to a Jim Crow prison system engineered for Black entrapment, or succumbing to sexual temptation with someone already infected with HIV. Ever since the abolitionist ethics of Booker T. Washington, the Black psyche has conceded that blaming ourselves for our social ills is easier than indicting a system engineered to undermine Black viability..d e vre se r sth HIV and AIDS and Black Respectability g ir llA.sre In 1995, hundreds of thousands of Black men descended upon the National Mall to protest h silb u our own propensity to live fully into the African American ideal originally enforced by the P kco tS oppressor under antebellum Christendom, long before we achieved our emancipation. At the & fp iW peak of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, with Minister Louis Farrakhan presiding, legions of.9 1 0 Black men joined together to reaffirm our Black dignity. Farrakhan summarized his epic 2 © th gathering in the Final Call: “The Million Man March, in one day, helped to defeat all of the g iryp o C evil propaganda spread about Black men throughout the world.”147 Rather than a sacred Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. outcry against anti-Black oppression, Minister Farrakhan attributed his march to a vision from God due in part to the need to warn Black men of the self-defeating plagues of gangs, crack cocaine, and gangsta rap.148 While the Million Man March may have offered a subtle critique of White supremacy and free market capitalism, the greater indictment was on our inability to live fully into Black self-affirmation. A similar message was promoted through Bill Cosby’s Black conservatism. Ever mindful of the plight of Black America, rather than condemning white supremacy wholesale, Cosby found it more appropriate to “grab the city’s black men by their collars and shake them out of the torpor that has left so many of them—like so many of their peers across the country— undereducated, overincarcerated, and underrepresented in the ranks of active fathers.”149 Mr. Cosby took this show on the roads that stretch from the rust belt America to the Deep South, preaching the gospel of Black respectability, saying, “Men, if you want to win, we can win. We are not a pitiful race of people. We are a bright race, who can move with the best. But we are in a new time, where people are behaving in abnormal ways and calling it normal.”150 Even as Bill Cosby’s legacy has fallen into ill repute and scandal, his message of Black revivalism has not. These gospels of Black paternalism intended to inspire moral courage and Black spiritual individualism are peddled across the Black community as the reason for our oppression and are cited by Whites to justify recklessly abandoning the problem of HIV in the Black community. Such ideologies have allowed the rates of HIV and AIDS among Black people to soar, even as these rates have declined drastically among Whites. The disease of Black respectability, fueled by a protestant social ethic inherited from our oppressors, prevents us from confronting the HIV and AIDS epidemic head-on. The notion that those impacted were infected due solely to moral and spiritual failing perpetuates shame and prevents us from seeking HIV testing and treatment that will inevitably eradicate the disease within privileged populations, leaving Black lives in dire straits. Theology of Black Shame The disproportionate impact of HIV and AIDS upon Black people is a consequence of the theology of Black shame. Not only have the gospels according to Minister Farrakhan and Bill Cosby infiltrated the Black community, but also the theology of White supremacy has.d e vre infused Black folk religion. Central to the social compact of the slave and slave master was se r sth the heresy that God is on the side of the oppressor, demanding the oppressed to obey them. g ir llA No other text from the Christian Scriptures affirms this more than, “Slaves, obey your earthly.sre h silb masters with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as you obey Christ.”151 Such u P kco obedience was incumbent upon the oppressed in order to achieve salvation on earth and in tS & the hereafter. Furthermore, one’s obedience to his master correlated directly to one’s fp iW.9 obedience to Christ. The inevitable outcome of such a compact is failure, in that slavery is 1 0 2 © inherently dehumanizing—the oppressor never sees the oppressed as fully human. This th g iryp dehumanization leaves the slave suspended in a self-defeating quest for survival and o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. believing that “if I am the model slave I will be rewarded by my God and my master, but if I fail I will be condemned.” This results in a perpetual state of Black shame. This notion is further deconstructed by the Father of Black liberation theology, Dr. James H. Cone, who writes: White Americans try to convince themselves that they have been innocent onlookers of that history, but black Americans evaluate the history of this country differently. For them, white Americans have pursued two principal courses of action with regard to blacks. First, they decreed that blacks were outside the realm of humanity, that blacks were animals and that their enslavement was best both for them and for society as a whole. And as long as black labor was needed, slavery was regarded as the only appropriate “solution” to the “black problem.” But when black labor was no longer needed, blacks were issued their “freedom,” the freedom to live in a society which attempted to destroy them physically and spiritually. There is no indication before or after the Civil War that this society recognized the humanity of black persons.152 The hope of Black liberation theology is deliverance from Black shame. Black shame reinforces the misnomer that blackness not in service to White supremacy has no value. Black liberation informs Black people of our own innate power in a culture that refuses to recognize our humanity. Unfortunately, this information has limited reach in a society where the same theology that enslaved the slave is empowered by privilege to the demise of Black lives. While a few Black icons are able to escape the claws of shame by living into our inherit humanity of Black liberation, the many among us are unable to see beyond the marred Black image reflected in the mirror of White supremacy. Challenged by the mandate of Black respectability, Black people diagnosed with HIV and AIDS immediately become mired in a yoke of Black shame that has plagued Black people from generation to generation. As if being Black isn’t shameful enough, Black people living with HIV and AIDS possess a more crippling shame that inhibits self-care. Black lives are lost unnecessarily when Black people, not wanting to admit that they are HIV positive, do not seek treatment and so we see increased HIV transmission levels. Therefore, an HIV icon the likes of Magic Johnson lacks efficacy in the lives of everyday Black people living with HIV.d e vre and AIDS. The legacy of Black shame can be eradicated only by a power greater than the se r sth feel-good stories of a few fortunate Black lives whose experience is insulated from the g ir llA everyday struggles that accompany the Black experience..sre h silb u P kco #BlackLiveswithHIVandAIDSMatter—Spiritual Care for Black People tS & Living with HIV and AIDS fp iW.9 1 What I loved most about the comfort that my mother found in the miracle of Magic’s survival 0 2 © th is the hope. Despite the sloppy politics of celebritizing HIV and AIDS, the grace and dignity g iryp o with which Magic, Carmen, and their gender queer son E. J. have navigated their C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. circumstances is undeniable. No magic pill was unveiled when Magic Johnson disclosed his status. What was unveiled to us was hope. Prior to Magic, our only hope was drug cocktails, kaposi sarcoma lesions, and facial wasting. The doom of dying White gay lives left little hope that Black lives would survive the plague. Magic Johnson changed that. Our HIV-AIDS icon renewed in the Black community our faith in modern medicine. The Johnson family gave the Black family a model for how to talk about HIV. Magic Johnson moved HIV/AIDS beyond being a distinction without a difference; we came to realize that Magic had HIV, not AIDS. Absent of a working theology or spiritual resources for confronting the disease, Magic Johnson gave Black people a framework for talking, listening, and responding to HIV and AIDS. While the church and state were knit together in silent complicity against Black lives infected with HIV and dying of AIDS, Magic Johnson’s still, small voice taught us how to overcome the fear of people who are positive, and gave us the courage to live positively with HIV. But just as the Black Lives Matter movement decries the paternalistic activism of Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson, Malcolm X and Martin, the #BlackLiveswithHIVandAIDSMatter movement needs no Magic. Black people living with HIV and AIDS in 2018 are detached from the riches of Magic, Carmen, and E. J., and feel exempt from the #BlackLivesMatter mantra. While the Black community has an HIV hero in Magic, Black people living with HIV and AIDS have no heroes. Black people living with HIV and AIDS simply need Black allies, Black advocates, and Black healing from Black people, rooted and grounded in the Black spiritual tradition. Spiritual Care of and from Black Allies The problem with Black liberation and Black power is the many who are left living in Black bondage and Black powerlessness. The theologies of Black respectability leave behind the many whose bootstraps are tattered and broken. The White theology of free market capitalism has limited space for Black self-respect and responsibility. HIV and AIDS further marginalize Blacks who are otherwise capable of accomplishing the American dream. The Black Lives Matter movement argues to Blacks and Whites alike that Black lives are innately esteemable, worthy of dignity, and sacred regardless of circumstance. To chant #BlackLivesMatter is to prosecute a system that indicts Black people for being Black and.d e uplifts White people for being White. All who take up our chant, whether Black or White, are vre se r sth our allies and co-agents of change in the movement of Black lives. g ir llA Providing spiritual care to Black people living with HIV and AIDS involves being an ally.sre who understands the nature of the disease and the nature of being Black in America. HIV and h silb u AIDS treatment and prevention have long centered on White HIV transmission as P kco tS mainstream. LGBTQ activism has leveraged White privilege to navigate systems and build & fp iW institutions that have filled the void left by a church and a state content to see gay men dead..9 1 0 Allies come in all colors and understand how these colors engage anti-Black racism. Black 2 © th allies understand the nuances of Black invisibility in the White gay community and the need g iryp o C for HIV and AIDS care for Black women. Black allyship eases the burden of navigating Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. inherently racist systems while also navigating the complications of living with a disease. Spiritual Care of Black Advocates Who Are Black While Black allies and advocates exist in all colors, here I will lift up Black advocates who are Black. The Black church, Black music, Black leadership, Black media, Black athleticism, and Black business all serve a special place in the souls of Black folk. Nike, Beats, Harpo, BET, AME, Tidal, Ebony, Motown, and FUBU are among the many institutions that reflect Black affirmation. Black affirmation is the mirror that reflects Blacks beauty and greatness. A Black person who fails to see her reflection is blind. Progress for those living with HIV and AIDS, while nothing short of a miracle in medical and social science reform, has by and large left Black communities behind. Black people serious about overcoming the stigma of living with HIV and AIDS are forced to transgress the boundaries of race in order to establish relationships with advocates beyond our Black neighborhoods. Such advocacy is inept in dealing with the intersections of race, class, gender, and sexuality unique to the Black experience. Black people living with HIV and AIDS are forced to endure the microaggressions of White supremacy perpetrated by those we depend on for survival. Black advocates who are Black, in close proximity to the lived experience of Black people advocate for people living with HIV and AIDS through the lens of Blackness. This requires that Black churches, Black institutions, and Black cultural icons join the movement Black Lives with HIV and AIDS Matter. Just as Black voices have embraced efforts to combat diabetes, sickle cell disease, and heart disease, so Black institutions must sponsor a platform for normalizing the prevention and treatment of HIV and AIDS. When the NBA stumbled in its attempt to stand with Magic Johnson, the Black community realized the risk of disclosure. A more steadfast show of solidarity with Magic Johnson’s plight would have decentered the story of a superstar and created a platform for the everyday experience of people living with HIV and AIDS. Healing in the Black Spiritual Tradition The backbone of the Black community is the Black spiritual tradition. Long before abolition, Black slaves were spiritually emancipated from the heresy of antebellum Christendom by.d e vre reimagining the religion of their oppressor. According to Dr. James H. Cone: se r sth g ir llA The task of black theology, then, is to analyze the nature of the gospel of Jesus.sre h Christ in the light of oppressed blacks so they will see the gospel as inseparable silb u P kco from their humiliated condition, and as bestowing on them the necessary power tS & to break the chains of oppression. This means that it is a theology of and for the fp iW black community, seeking to interpret the religious dimensions of the forces of.9 1 0 2 © liberation in that community.153 th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.