for persons living with chronic illness in order to address their long-term emotional needs. Unhealthy nutritional practices speak to the psychological health of a person. Mental health services could help persons living with chronic illness to address psychological concerns that are leading to poor meal choices. Further, African Americans still struggle with unresolved psychological trauma since the days of African enslavement in the United States from 1619 to 1865; this trauma causes some African Americans to self-sabotage through unhealthy, emotional eating. Last but not least, persons living with chronic illnesses have existential needs. Persons newly diagnosed with a chronic illness experience what could be considered a life-changing event in that these persons may be unable to return to their normal daily activities or to their previous careers. Persons newly diagnosed with a chronic illness partake in developing a new life identity, meaning, and purpose. Chaplains, clergy, and pastors can help facilitate this process of discernment by asking the following questions: • Aside from your current gifts, what are your other skills and talents? • Aside from your current profession, what are other career paths that you’ve been interested in? • Do you have a grandchild(ren)? How can you become more involved as a grandparent? • What social service activities give you joy and peace? How can you become more involved with them? • Are you open to going back to school, or enrolling in a certificate program in a new subject? • How can you become more involved in a religious faith community and volunteer more in a local ministry program? In conclusion, addressing food oppression leading to chronic illness in the African American community calls for more than pastoral, sacrilegious responses. We need practical resolutions that address the root causes of problems, not simply pastoral band aids. The church’s response to challenging politics and implementing health resources is a start. What else would you add? The combination of reflection and action is key. African American health depends on it. African American life depends on it. African American survival depends on it..d e vre se r sth 176. Abel, “What McDonald’s Can Teach Us.” g ir llA.sre 177. Ferdman, “Disturbing Ways That Fast Food Chains.” h silb 178. Ibid. u P kco 179. Center for Disease Control, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, “African tS & American Health.” fp iW.9 180. Ibid. 1 0 2 © 181. Ibid. th g iryp 182. Umberson and Montez, “Social Relationships and Health.” o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 183. Qualls, “What Social Relationships Can Do for Health.” 184. Jim Crow is the time period in the United States from 1865 to 1954 in which local legislation primarily in southern states upheld racist practices against African Americans. 185. Ferdman, “Disturbing Ways That Fast Food Chains.” 186. American Psychological Association, “Coping with a Diagnosis of Chronic Illness.” 187 General Practice Alliance (South Gippsland, Australia), Self Care Strategies, 16–17; see also Burns, Feeling Good..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. PART 3 Caring for African American Marriages, LGBT Partnerships, and Families.d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 14 Finding a Mate the Same Hue as You A Systemic Review of Mate Selection Barriers among African Americans, Spiritual Resources, and Therapeutic Interventions H C L EATHER. OFTON The pursuit of finding a mate is researched using the term mate selection, and this chapter will continue using that term for definitive clarity.188 Prov 18:22 proclaims, “He who finds a wife finds a good thing, and obtains favor from the L.”189 Prior to embarking upon the ORD “covenant” and “sacred bond” so eloquently and biblically defined, as marriage, all active and nonactively seeking human beings navigate the process of finding a mate. The selection process has cultural grounding, encompassing traditions ranging from arranged marriages to polyamory. Noting the historical and current trends on marriage among African American men and women, one can venture to say that seeking a spouse irrefutably involves sociocultural determining factors.190 While both scientific and religious conceptual frameworks emphasize the universal and essential nature of healthy intimate-partner relationships, sociocultural influences on mate selection in the Black community require further exploration. Focusing predominately on the United States (U.S.) African American population, I will analyze the process of mate selection, provided generational and systemic social climate transitions. Now, historically, the undertaking of mate selection among African Americans was rooted in the constraining elements of slavery.191 Contemporaneously, African American men and women seeking a mate are combating increasing incarceration rates for African American males, the objectification of African American females (e.g., through the image of the strong Black woman [SBW]), violence within and against the Black community, and mental and physical health disparity trends.192 Many of these compelling factors hampering the mate selection process appear to be anchored in the intersections of.d e racism, sexism and classism.193 vre se r sth Observed through the restorative tenants of the Black Lives Matter movement and social g ir llA research on mate selection, inherent relationships can be detected within and between the.sre aforementioned social constructs and events, consequently claiming the Black community h silb u and potentially, systemically compromising the sustainability of mate selection among P kco tS African Americans. As overwhelming as that notion is, the quest for solutions seems even & fp iW more grandiose. How, where, and when can we intervene? Movements such as.9 1 0 #BlackLivesMatter encourage all people to come together and find solace within relational 2 © th structures (e.g., the couple, the family, the neighborhood, the workplace, or the church) that g iryp o share the same purpose of reclaiming community power and privilege and ultimately C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. preserving the lives of a historically oppressed and marginalized population. Black relationships are an important ingredient in the repair process and sustenance of the Black community, and these unions are at risk.194 In order to intervene with resilient solutions, this chapter examines current spiritual and therapeutic guidelines backed by research, and interventions for combating barriers to mate selection. Current State of Mate Selection Present-day trends among men and women getting married, not specifying race, show an overall delay of marriage, as the average age for getting married for both men and women has increased.195 Between the years 1980 and 2012, the statistics on marriage reveal the average age at first marriage for women has extended by 21 percent, from twenty-two years old to twenty-six years old, and for men the average age of first marriage has risen from twenty-five years of age to twenty-nine years old.196 Not accounting for technological and other societal advancements, what else could contribute to the delay of marriage? The theoretical construct of mate selection is currently researched in relationship to the term marriage market.197 A marriage market defines the pool of available individuals for marriage, matched by common factors.198 Components such as educational attainment, socioeconomic status, race, religion, and sexual orientation are some determinants of marriage market eligibility.199 In a study surveying the desired personal characteristics of an ideal African American marriage partner, results show that both Black men and Black women seek a mate that presents with affluence; Black men and women both want to choose from a pool of a “well-educated, financially stable, monogamous, spiritual, religious, self- confident, and reliable individuals.”200 Yet, given the current social climate exposing alarming violence rates, unemployment rates, and educational and health disparities, these desired personal characteristics for a Black mates seem unavailable. For the African American population, mate selection constraints can potentially inform the significant decline in marriage rates among Blacks. Analyzing these findings from a cultural perspective, specific concerns within the Black community have the potential to influence processes, such as mate selection. For example, violence has increased within and against the Black community.201 Gang and gun violence and police brutality have flooded the Black.d e community so that defining Black identity apart from these forces (for example, by finding a vre se r sth mate) has become more difficult.202 The Black Lives Matter movement was founded on the g ir llA unjust killings and overall unjust treatment of Black men, women, and children. Dissecting.sre h the severity of the oppressions Black people experience exposes the damaging effects such silb u P events have on constructs such as mate selection. kco tS & fp iW Mate Selection Barriers.9 1 0 2 © Educational Attainment th g iryp o C The current state of mate selection among African American men and women living in the Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. U.S. is researched in relationship to educational attainment. Historically African Americans have had a triumphant journey with education. Dating back to slavery, Africans were not allowed to develop literacy; learning how to read and write were forbidden.203 Maintaining a sense of resilience, slaves would surreptitiously find ways to learn and excel, with the goal of strengthening the community and utilizing education as a survival tactic.204 Leaders such as Booker T. Washington, Benjamin Banneker, and Benjamin W. Arnett have paved the way for current scholars, essentially creating an educational shield of protection for the generations to come. While the salience of education in the Black community has significant roots, sustaining the academic success of Black men and women is systemically challenged, potentially compromising other elements of their growth and development, such as finding a mate. African American women are now one of the most educated demographics in the U.S., superseding Black men.205 According to the National Center for Educational Statistics, between and, Black women earned “ percent of associate’s degrees, percent of 2009 2010 68 66 bachelor’s degrees, percent of master’s degrees and percent of all doctorate degrees 71 65 awarded to black students.”206 This education gap between Black women and Black men plays a part in the decreasing number of African American marriages.207 Although these statistics have a victorious ring to them, a question about the academic trajectories of Black males arises: why are Black females surpassing Black males in educational attainment? In addition, while Black women are becoming the most educated population in the U.S., they still fill a very small percentage of white-collar jobs. In addition, while Black women are becoming the most educated population in the U.S., they still fill a very small percentage of white-collar jobs.208 This then exposes the complication of highly educated yet underemployed Black women finding partnerships with undereducated and underemployed Black men. What are the long-term affects of this apparent and burgeoning pattern? Could the gap in educational attainment between Black men and women inadvertently influence the mate selection process and potential marriage market? The unresearched yet obvious answer is, of course. The current observed and speculated dialogue around dating in the Black community invites comments like this: “Where are the eligible Black men?” and “That woman doesn’t need a partner; she can do it on her own.” Given their vulnerable position, Black men, it is conjectured, are being systematically and permanently.d e vre incapacitated by unjust social structures and events. se r sth g ir llA The Strong Black Woman Persona.sre h silb While African American women are seemingly excelling, at times the journey is not a u P kco smooth path, and in many instances Black women tackle constraining social pressures as tS & fp well. Black women have for centuries endured the multiple oppressions of being Black and iW.9 1 being women. Despite historical restrictions of socially constructed, debilitating images such 0 2 © th as the welfare mother, the jezebel, and the sapphire, Black women maintain matriarchal g iryp o status within the Black community.209 The development of the strong Black woman (SBW) C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. schema is an image that encompasses the stigma of historical hardships endured, portraying a woman who can complete all tasks and withstand all trials, without breaking a sweat.210 The concept of strength the in the Black female community has maintained a sense of perseverance, mental endurance, power and prayer, while solidifying the experience of intersecting oppressions.211 In popular culture, the SBW is a powerhouse. She is often displayed as the CEO of her own company, the head of her household, and a pillar of her community. While this image has so many salient messages, the experience of the stressed out and emotionally drained SBW is not as popular. The other side of the SBW may feel quite alone in her experience. Although it is not researched, could the SBW be a response to the scarcity of available men? Rarely is the SBW image paired with a partner. Standing in solidarity with women’s rights and not suggesting that women couldn’t fulfill such roles and requirements without a mate, there is an unmistakably large number of Black women transcending societal limitations and barriers, with a small number of men to share that experience with. Violence in the Black Community The multifaceted nature of #BlackLivesMatter exposes the intersections of race and gender, in addition to the systemic and patterned components of the violent events that preceded the movement. Violence against and within the Black community is an anteceding factor maintaining mass incarceration of Black men in America.212 Gang violence and police brutality are the current trending acts of violence that harm the Black community’s perpetually at-risk social status.213 Violence within the Black community has been researched, and the critical influence such acts have on employment and family structure has been acknowledged.214 Exposing the relationship between high rates of crime within the Black community and structural deprivation of social status, researchers have already uncovered the determining affect that the persistent mass incarceration of Black men is having on the production of female-led families and households—which has a cyclical affect on family disruption.215 Further analyzing these findings and hypothesizing with the researched correlations between violence, mass incarceration, unemployment, poverty and family disruption cultivates a potential bond between violence in the Black community and.d mate selection. e vre se Discussing the modern trends on mate selection and the overall health of Black unions r sth g stimulates a conversation about the influences of the current social climate and the perceived ir llA.sre structural barriers to maintaining the fragility of Black relationships, marriages, and families. h silb Although violence in the Black community is predominately researched (revealing the u P kco alarming, increasing incarceration rates of Black men), Black families face significant tS & fp pressures because in gun violence, gang violence, and in police brutality. These pressures iW.9 1 must be investigated further. 0 2 © th g iryp Mass Incarceration of Black Men o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Parallel to the increased rate of African American female educational attainment are the distressing increases in African American male incarceration rates. Black men have a long- standing history with the U.S. prison system, which consequently has systemically and structurally damaged the Black male identity, individually and relationally.216 Harming the Black community in its entirety, Black male incarceration puts both the Black family and Black intimate partner relationships at risk.217 Although percent of Americans identify as 12 African American, percent of African Americans have been to jail, and percent have 35 37 been to prison;218 sometimes they are arrested for crimes such as walking while Black. While Black lives (and specifically Black men’s lives) receive sparse social and governmental protection, the repercussions for such displacement are weakening opportunities for educational attainment, economic stability, employment, and mate selection.219 Encouraging a detrimental domino affect, limitations in one area inform the status of the next. For example, African American men who are subject to the prison system are researched in association with poverty and limited access to adequate education, which then has the potential to constrain their future of occupational success.220 While these social journeys of Black men and women run parallel to each While these social journeys of Black men and women run parallel to each other, social factors affecting African American men are creating a discrepancy for Black women between available and eligible mate options. Spiritual Resources and Therapeutic Interventions While the development of the Black Lives Matter movement was a response to the unjust killings of individuals such as Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Tamir Rice, and Philando Castile, the movement is also a means of community resilience. The individuals in community with these slain men and boys were daughters, sons, sisters, brothers, mothers, and fathers. Each young man who was murdered was removed form his Black family structure so that the vulnerability of Black families, Black marriages, and Black lives was perpetuated. Although mate selection may not overtly appear to be challenged by the affects of violence, police brutality, racism, or sexism, you now have an understanding of the perceived concomitant risks of finding a mate. How can we begin to transition the glaring trends of mate selection in the Black community? With no intent to discourage, awareness.d can promote action. Through education, awareness, access, and action, the Black Lives e vre se Matter movement offers an intervening push toward the eradication of not only violence r sth g against minorities, racism, and sexism, but also the wide range of limitations these events put ir llA.sre on the community. It is imperative to be aware of and to have access to resources that can aid h silb in combating the multifarious constraints of these systemic issues. Provided the cursory u P kco review of historical structures and the current state of mate selection and barriers within the tS & fp black community, a review of spiritual guideposts and therapeutic interventions aligns with iW.9 all-conquering quest of the Black Lives Matter movement. 1 0 2 © th g iryp Spirituality and Mate Selection o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. The Bible introduces the first array of couples, the journeys of their individual selves, the divine nature of their meeting, and the trials and tribulations of their unions. The lessons on how to achieve partnership, commitment, and love are compounded in the stories of couples such as Isaac and Rebekah, Zechariah and Elizabeth, and Joseph and Mary. Within each couple’s relationship are the plights to achieve relationship success, combat relational hardships with faith, and transition through life with a united front, protected and guided by God. For instance, Zechariah and Elizabeth teach us that faithful prayer and humble patience with God, will serve as a guidepost towards God’s will for their relationship.221 In their case, Zechariah’s prayer was for a son, and his faithful service and trust in God’s will ultimately blessed himself and Elizabeth with John.222 They each prayed for the success of their union and the development of their family, and their prayers were answered, but not without great trials, weaknesses, and sometimes even doubt. During this current troubling time in society, when peace, love, partnership, and community are being tested, the unions that preceded our time teach us that such events require prayer. While prayer is a means to discuss with God what you believe you need, want, and are ready for, God requires commitment to his will. Isaac and Rebekah remind us that love and relationships require commitment.223 God gives us the power to decide, and we decide to love. Isaac did not meet his wife until the day of their wedding, but they decide to commit to each other and to love one another. Last, alongside prayer and commitment is the command for action. After all, God is always listening and guiding us toward his will, so once we have committed to the task, be ready to act. We learn from Joseph and Mary that love is a verb, and that relationships require action. Action can be accomplished both individually and together. Joseph and Mary faced formidable challenges during and after the birth of Jesus—challenges that place stress on their relationship.224 They show each other the love present in their relationship in order to fight the hostilities and uncertainties of the world. Their union exudes respect, trust, prayer, commitment, and action. These relationships, among many in the Bible, serve as guideposts for building and maintaining a relationship but also the journey towards finding one. History of Mate Selection Although the process of mate selection used to involve elders, parents, and servants choosing.d e vre a mate for a child, the sought-after union was always a part of God’s will. Now these biblical se r sth mating practices are no longer used regularly, but some cultural elements of mate selection g ir llA.sre within the Black community remain rooted in spirituality. In fact, a variety of historical h silb mating practices dates back to slavery; these practices have greatly influenced the current u P kco mate selection behaviors among Black men and women. Whereas slaves were not allowed to tS & engage in anything ceremonial or ritual based such as a wedding, mating traditions and fp iW.9 behaviors were centered on necessity and rested on the sanctity of spirituality.225 During 1 0 2 © slavery, men, women, and children were taken from their homes, spouses, and families, never th g iryp to return—and presumably unable to ever find any resemblance of such a bond ever again. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. While Black people were held against their will and forced to live a life of servitude, relationships and family were means of survival.226 Therefore finding a mate during slavery did not necessarily accommodate personal interests and subjective fancies, such as physical appearance, stylish clothes, or even the idea of love at first sight. The desired attributes of a partner were predominately based on culturally constructed partner roles and characteristics.227 Quite gendered, the roles entailed the ability for a man to provide, and protect, and of a woman to serve, nurture, and support.228 Many, if not each of those role- based qualities can be found in the mate selection requirements of Black men and women today; unfortunately, along with these traits can be found the consistently vulnerable status of Black families and marriages. So, how can we continue to learn from Isaac and Rebekah, Joseph and Mary, and, Zechariah and Elizabeth? During this immobilizing time for Black individuals, couples, and families, in what ways can we continue to promote resilience through prayer, commitment, and action when the focus is finding a mate? Spiritual Resources Within the Black community seeking clergy for personal prayer and assistance has diverse meanings and purposes. African Americans have been researched in relationship to seeking clergy for personal healing, physical healing, and relational healing.229 The biblical grounding of relationships encourages the use of assistance when preparing for and preserving an intimate partner relationship. Seeking clergy members for interpersonal help begins with making sure you’re one with God. Clergy members encourage commitment to another person, yet not without a personal commitment to Christ first. This commitment then motivates the need to seek a partner that you can share your faith with.230 Seeking clergy to address various personal concerns has helped protect help-seeking behaviors within the Black community. Help-seeking behaviors are the actions and attempts targeting access to assistance for a presenting problem.231 Given the historically poor relationship to mental and physical healthcare institutions, Black community members have found comfort, resolution, and many times solutions to major life events from the aid of the church. The relationship between the Black community and the Black church, is quite close. Possessing a tender vulnerability, Black men, women, and children find sodality in the.d e church setting, developing a sincere sense of trust, confidentiality, reliability, and hope.232 vre se The life events and stories requiring healing and guidance from clergy are bountiful. Needing r sth g ir llA prayer and requesting guidance, healing, or both is not specific to physical ailments, death,.sre and divorce, but also might relate to the transitional time of finding a mate. h silb u P kco Spiritual Premarital Counseling tS & fp iW In order to place ease and reassurance on the quest for a mate, we must put our faith in God..9 1 0 2 © While the current and universal state of mate selection is an impaired entity alone, adding a th g iryp drop or two of melanin invites a host of additional constraining factors. Maintaining the use o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. of spiritual guidance, in addition to prayer, what can individuals do to aid the process of finding a mate? The use of spiritual counseling and spiritual premarital counseling have both been researched in relation to Black couples, conclusively highlighting the positive outcomes both resources provide.233 Operating within regimented parameters, spiritual counseling can guide not only the process of finding a mate, but also preparation for the journey.234 In fact, in the African American community, Black clergypersons report that adequately addressing premarital content, utilizing a skills-based approach in marriage counseling, and considering marriage preparation are crucial elements of ministry.235 Spiritual counseling as it relates to the lives of Black men and women, has a rich history. Individuals and couples have been confiding in church clergy for centuries, praying for the perfect man or woman or seeking a healing hand for relational turmoil: this resource remains quite available and an asset to the potential needs of the current Black community. Therapeutic Interventions and Mate Selection—Marriage and Family Therapy Responding to systemic constraints, the Black Lives Matter movement not only wants to eliminate violence against minorities, specifically African Americans, but also calls for overall societal resilience. Now that we follow the trends that place Black marriages and Black families at risk, the next step is intervention. In addition to the realms of spiritual guidance via spiritual counseling and premarital counseling is an additional field of study designed to meet the needs of a community through the subsystems within the community (i.e., individuals, couples and families). Marriage and family therapy is a growing form of therapeutic intervention that recognizes the systems to which individuals belong, and how they interact. A level of integration occurs among marriage and family therapy theories and treatment models—an integration serves the cultural elements of individual and relational needs.236 In order to address the challenges of mate selection, utilizing a resource that analyzes relationship structures to solve problems has potential to promote positive outcomes. Provided a variety of systemic interventions, marriage and family therapists align with individual, couple or family needs—all while working from an integration of treatment models that will best serve. In addition, therapists are able work with clients of diverse.d backgrounds, encompassing differing socioeconomic backgrounds, different races, genders, e vre se and sexual orientations. r sth g Preparing for a mate is indeed a part of the mate selection process. While the goal is to ir llA.sre find a mate that checks off the majority of your desired traits, men and women also have to h silb make sure they meet their own expectations as well. Research supports that marriage u P kco preparation has been found to improve marital satisfaction, increase spousal commitment, tS & fp and contribute to a 31-percent decrease in the divorce rate.237 A small 37 percent of diverse iW.9 1 couples in the U.S. disclosed receiving a form of premarital counseling, and “86 percent 0 2 © th strongly agreed and encourage couples to engage in premarriage preparation (i.e., therapy, g iryp premarital counseling), while 46 percent agreed or strongly agreed premarital counseling o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. should be required by law before receiving a marriage license.”238 While therapeutic and educational programs addressing intimate partner relationships and preparation are traditionally accessible only to White, middle-class couples, more diverse resources are available today then ever before.239 For African American men and women struggling to find a mate and discouraged by the current social climate, now is the time to get a sense of the resources available, not only for exploring a relationship with someone else, but also for exploring the relationship you have with yourself. Conclusion Now that you have a brief but comprehensive understanding of the historical factors of mate selection, the current state of finding a mate, and spiritual guideposts and therapeutic interventions for counteracting the many societal restrictions afflicting the Black community, we must follow the word: “Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.”240 The Black Lives Matter movement has exposed the inadequacies of a system that was designed to serve and protect. The systemic affects of violence in the Black community are multifaceted, altering not only the life of a Black individual but also the sustainability of Black couples and Black families. While the process of mate selection within the Black community is in a vulnerable proposition, be reminded that Black love is still attainable and beautiful when maintained. After all, “Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their toil.”241 188. Hughes and Hertel, “Significance.” 189. Prov 18:22 (NRSV). 190. Hill, “Marriage.” 191. Ibid. 192. Charles and Luoh, “Male Incarceration”; Messner and Sampson, “Sex Ratio”; Abrams et al., “Carrying”; Bell, et al., “Afrocentric”; Bentancourt et al., “Defining Cultural Competence.” 193. Bell et al., “Afrocentric.” 194. Johnson and Loscocco, “Black Marriage.”.d e vre 195. Sassler, “Partnering.” se r sth 196. Arroyo et al., Crossover in Median Age,1–2. g ir llA.sre 197. Sassler, “Partnering,” 557–75. h silb 198. Goldman, et al., “Demography.” u P kco 199. Ibid. tS & fp 200. King and Allen, “Personal.” iW.9 1 201. Desmond et al., “Police.” 0 2 © th 202. Ibid.; Chambers and Kravitz, “Understanding.” g iryp o 203. Bertocchi and Arcangelo, “Racial Gap.” C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 204. Ibid. 205. King, “Multiple.” 206. Osborne, “Black Women,” lines 1–4. 207. McDaniel et al., “Black.” 208. Brewer, “Theorizing.” 209. Gilkes, “Liberated.” 210. Abrams et al., “Carrying.” 211. Walker-Barnes, “Burden.” 212. Western and Wildeman, “Black Family.” 213. Messner and Sampson, “Sex Ratio.” 214. Sampson, “Effect”; Messner and Sampson, “Sex Ratio.” 215. Sampson, “Effect”; Western and Wildeman, “Black Family.” 216. Western and Wildeman, “Black Family.” 217. Charles and Luoh, “Male Incarceration.” 218. Zeng, “Jail,” 1. 219. Lopoo and Western, “Incarceration”; Western and Wildeman, “Black Family”; Charles and Luoh, “Male Incarceration.” 220. Pettit and Western, “Life Course”; Western and Wildeman, “Black Family.” 221. Luke 1:1–25 (NRSV). 222. Ibid. 223. Gen 24:2–66 (NRSV). 224. Matt 1: 18–25 (NRSV). 225. Hill, “Marriage.” 226. Dill et al., “Fictive Kin.” 227. Cherlin, “American Marriage.” 228. Ibid.; Pinderhughes, “African American Marriage.” 229. Giger et al., “Church and Spirituality.” 230. Waite and Lehrer, “Benefits.” 231. Rickwood and Thomas, “Conceptual Measurement Framework.”.d 232. Giger et al., “Church and Spirituality.” e vre se 233. Weaver et al., “Marriage and Family Therapists”; Hine and Boyd-Franklin, “African American Families.” r sth g ir llA 234. Stanley et al., “Community‐Based.”.sre 235. Wilmoth and Blaney, “African American Clergy.” h silb u 236. Awosan et al., “Understanding the Experience.” P kco tS 237. Stanley et al., “Community‐Based.” & fp iW 238. Ibid..9 1 0 2 239. Halford et al., “Strengthening.” © th g iryp 240. Heb 11:1 NRSV. o C 241. Eccl 4:9 NRSV. Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 15 The Talk Black Fathers, Black Sons—Letters to Survive J D H D F AMIE. AWLEY AND ERRICK LOYD By almost every measure, the group that is facing some of the most severe challenges in the 21st century in this country are boys and young men of color —President Barack Obama Just a boy from the hood that Got my hands in the air In despair don’t shoot I just wanna do good —Jay-Z Black Fathers Matter! —God In this chapter the authors (both fathers of Black sons, both educators, both pastors, and both spiritual care providers) have been asked to focus on Black fatherhood and raising sons in the age of #BlackLivesMatter. While we have been asked to focus on Black males and fatherhood for this chapter, it is important to note that the challenges faced by Black fathers and the social disparities of raising Black boys are in many ways the challenges of Black women and the disparate challenges of raising Black girls. My coauthor and I are sons, brothers, uncles, and nephews. We are college graduates, counselors, educators, pastors, and chaplains. What we are most proud of is having the privilege to be our sons’ Dad. We approach this task by writing letters to our sons..d e vre The Talk se r sth Jamie D. Hawley g ir llA.sre Dear Son, h silb u P kco It breaks my heart into a million pieces to have to write to you these words, and yet I know tS & that they are necessary to keep you alive. These words are necessary because sadly we live in fp iW.9 an age where human beings are still ranked, valued, judged, marginalized, and deconstructed 1 0 2 © according to race, gender, class, and sexuality. We live in age where your skin, kissed by th g iryp God, was marginalized, demonized, criminalized, and viewed as threatening all before you o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.