were born. More and more Black and Brown communities are under the siege and assault of gentrifying. Gentrification is dangerous. It perpetuates violence against Black people to make White people feel “safe.” You must know that your assertion will be viewed as aggression. Your self-pride and dignity will be viewed as uppity. Thinking critically will be viewed as being noncompliant. Your curiosity will be interpreted as being challenging. Your country’s social contract with White supremacy, racism, and cultural (In)competence means that all of your lives are at risk... your social, political, financial-economic, and physical life. I must tell you that they’ll shoot you on credit. They will shoot first and ask questions later. They’ll kill you and dismiss your entire life, using a three-word, cold, calculated, and cookie-cutter dry script, “I felt threatened.” Your feelings will not matter. Reason and rationality will not matter. Facts will not matter. And to some, to many, your very life will not matter. It is because of the sin of Whiteness and America’s longtime love affair with imperialist White supremacist capitalist patriarchy that I lift my voice as your father to join in what has become an international declaration. After the cold-blooded murder of a child who looked like you do now, who dressed like you do now, who was as innocent as you are now, and who was gunned down by a racist vigilante when he was the exact age that you are now Black Lives Matter! It is what I shouted on the streets of Ferguson, Mo, one week after the murder of another Black child. Black Lives Matter! It is what you and I shouted as we marched through the streets of Washington DC after the murder of Sandra Bland. Black Lives Matter! Black Lives Matter! Black Lives Matter! Born in the Struggle I was there as the pregnancy test turned pink. I was there when your mother began spotting in the middle of night and threatened to miscarry again. In panic and fear I drove her to the closest civilian emergency room. Little did I know that coming to the hospital would be my daily routine for the next month or so. I took your mother to the doctor’s office every other day to have blood work drawn to monitor if the pregnancy was progressing, if you were progressing. The doctor placed your mother on bed rest for the next two trimesters. The doctor graciously allowed me come back every odd day to find out the results. She said to me with a nod and a wink “I can’t tell you the results of your wife’s test, but if you should happen to look over my shoulder as I’m entering the results in her medical record, then I.d e can’t help that.” It still seems odd to some but nevertheless true that I went to the doctor’s vre se r sth office literally more times than your mother throughout the pregnancy. I had to know that g ir llA you were okay. And every day your mother and I rejoiced in knowing that you were still.sre actively fighting to come into this world. h silb u I was there when you were born. I was there when the doctor informed your mother and P kco tS me of the health anomalies you were born with. I was there to be your primary care provider, & fp iW to feed you in the middle of the night, to change your diapers. Why wouldn’t I be? You.9 1 0 changed my entire world. You made me something that I had never been before: a father. 2 © th g iryp o June 2001 C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. You were two months old. You and I made the pilgrimage from Florida, where we resided at that time, to Texas, where your grandparents lived. I drove the distance because given your heart condition, flying was not safe. Being with and caring for you felt quite natural to me. Which is why I thought nothing of being pulled over by a Louisiana police officer one day and being interrogated. I was sure that I was not speeding. I was certain that my license plates and registration were current. As the officer approached my vehicle wearing a cowboy hat he demanded in a deep southern drawl “Where’s the baby’s momma?” I was shocked. I hadn’t broken any laws or ordinances. I immediately recalled the many times my father had given me “the talk.” “The talk” in essence consisted of that conversation where a Black parent tells their Black child those things that are necessary to keep the child from danger. “Dad, what do I do if I’m ever stopped by the police,” I’d ask. “Son, first thing is that it is not a matter of IF but WHEN you are stopped by the police. Don’t talk back. Say yes sir and no sir—yes ma’am and no ma’am. Do what you are told. Make sure you keep your hands open and in plain sight at all times. Don’t talk back.” And most importantly, he would say, “Make sure you live to survive another day.” I answered the officer with as much humility as I could muster. I smiled, lowered my shoulders, made sure not to give him too much direct eye contact or personality. It was the first time I felt completely vulnerable as your father, knowing that my ability to protect you was literally at the mercy of someone else. After I explained, he asked me for my driver’s license and registration. I explained to him that I needed to reach into my back pocket to retrieve my license. As I gave him my license I also made sure to give him my active-duty military ID card. I had hoped that flashing him my military ID would humanize me to him. Employing the lessons I learned from your granny and pawpaw must have worked. He eventually let us go. I would feel completely vulnerable as your father a few more times throughout your young childhood, but never as reminded of that vulnerability as I was the day that I knew for sure that you realized and understood your Blackness in an American context. “Dad,” you asked, “what do I do if I’m ever stopped by the police?” August 2014 “Dad, what do I do if I’m ever stopped by the police?” you asked me one summer hot day..d e You stared inquisitively at me. The murder of teen and recent high school graduate Mike vre se r sth Brown by Darren Wilson was all over the news. I could tell that you were genuinely g ir llA concerned. I was too. You were just fourteen years old, but I knew that to culturally.sre incompetent people you would be seen as older and not as an innocent child. Seven. That is h silb u how old you were when you lost your innocence to some. I vividly remember coming to your P kco tS second-grade parent-teacher conference at your suburban primary school and sitting across a & fp iW table from your teacher, a White woman in her early to midtwenties. “Jamie hugs me a lot.9 1 0 and I’m uncomfortable with it,” she said coldly. “I’ve told him several times that he’s at an 2 © th age where he needs to ask permission to hug people and not just attack them.” There is was. g iryp o C At seven years old, the person that I had entrusted to teach you reading, writing, and Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. mathematics already viewed you as a hypersexualized brute who needed to be tamed as opposed to the innocent child you were, growing up without the presence of his mother in his daily life. While that moment was disappointing, it certainly was not surprising to me, and neither should it be for anyone. What we know is that Black boys are disproportionately expelled or suspended in public schools for behaving similarly to their White male peers.242 What we know is that Black boys as young as seven years of age on average are viewed as older, bigger, and less innocent than their White counterparts, and automatically guilty.243 The most recent example that garnered national attention was the murder of Tamir Rice. Tamir was a twelve-year-old boy playing (like all children do) across the street from his home with a toy gun (like all children do) when a neighbor (a White woman) called 911 with concerns about “a man brandishing a weapon at the park.” Only two seconds after the officer drove up, he shot and killed him. Speaking with his dispatcher he says “Shots fired... male down... maybe twenty.” What we know is that most White boys raised in wealthy families will stay rich or upper-middle- class as adults, but Black boys raised in similarly rich households will not. What we know is that a Black man with a degree is more likely to be passed over for a job than is a White man who dropped out of high school AND has a criminal record!244 We also know that at as young as seven years of age, White children believe that Black children are less capable of actually feeling physical pain.245 Perhaps for this very reason Black children are likely to spend a longer period of time in an emergency room waiting area than White children are, and for this very reason Black children and are almost 40 percent less likely to be given pain medication in a situation when White children would receive it. We also know that the disparity in pain medication continues from childhood to adulthood for African Americans.246 We know that Black men are disproportionately stopped by the police, arrested, convicted and issued stiffer fines, penalties, and longer confinement sentences.247 We also know that white evangelical Christians continue to overwhelmingly believe that the criminal justice system treats people of color and Whites equally.248 In almost every factor Black boys are worse off than their White peers. This is not merely coincidence or luck of the draw. This inequality is human made, maintained, and sustained. It is why Ta-Nehisi Coates defines being Black as “being at the bottom.”249 The examples of persisting inequality are not an exception to the status quo. They entail the epitome of the status quo. Despite the.d e vre se well-documented history of racial inequalities throughout society; despite all the empirically r sth verified studies, data, documentaries, books, journals; interviews and testimonies, many still g ir llA.sre claim not to know that these inequalities exist. h silb What we know is that Black boys are under attack. Those under attack must find places of u P kco refuge and liberation. When I was your age, the Black church was that place for me. Today I tS & worry that it may not be such a place for you. fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th The Black Church250 g iryp o C Sadly, many of our churches are distracted with pie-in-the-sky theology and the prosperity Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. gospel, with denominationalism and dogma, and with personal piety instead of public policy. Evangelical churches are easily entertained with so-called prophets who can tell you your name and the last digit of your Social Security number, and who engage in other sensational gimmicks. This religious sensationalism and entertainment is no different from that of a psychic. However, a biblical prophet is someone with the courage to speak truth to power. Even Pharaoh’s prophets could turn water into blood, summon frogs, and turn sticks into snakes. What they could not or rather would not do was to tell Pharaoh that he was dead wrong for holding God’s people as slaves and to demand that he let them go. A true prophet’s role is not to entertain evangelical churches but to discern what the Lord has to say about what is happening in our local city halls, in our state governments, in the White House and in the world at large. What does the Lord have to say about racism and sexism, homophobia and heterosexism, capitalism and poverty, hunger and homelessness—to name a few types of oppression? True prophets speak truth to power. True prophets put their butts on the line. I suspect that many who call themselves prophets would more accurately be described as magicians, performing nothing more than magic tricks for entertainment in exchanged for an offering. In an era when our children are being educated in dilapidating schools until they’re old enough to be shipped off to prisons, in an era when our children can be shot and killed and the perpetrator can go free, in an era when Black women earn at a minimum twenty-five cents less than Black men solely because they don’t have a penis,251 I echo Marvin A. McMickles’s sentiment when he poetically and prophetically asks, “Where have all the prophets gone?”252 Conversely, progressive churches often are drowning in classism and elitism. One of the many examples of this snobbery is the question, often asked: where did you go to school? Often behind this question is not an attempt to get to know someone; rather the question is asked in order to determine how much respect to give the one who’s asked. Interestingly enough, the higher the prestige of the school and the greater the accomplishment and status, the more the individual becomes “like family.” Whether “that’s my brother” or that’s my “sister,” depends on his or her qualifications, of course.The Black church of the ‘ s gave 60 birth the civil rights movement, a movement that has been borrowed and copied many times domestically and internationally by other marginalized groups. Our reality is that Black millennials have now caught up with White millennials and are leaving the church and.d e organized religion at alarming rates253—so much so that Princeton University professor vre se r sth Eddie Glaude declared in an op-ed, “The Black church, as we have known it, is dead.” If we g ir llA are not careful, the modern-day church will not pass along anything living or lasting..sre h silb u In Closing P kco tS & Son, although you live a world that marginalizes you and insists that you are a minority, fp iW.9 despite the fact that globally there are more people who look like you than there are those 1 0 2 © who believe themselves to be White, you are uniquely special. Even though you are my th g iryp namesake, there will never be another you. You bear the imprimatur of the divine. You are o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. my son. You are a walking sun. Your light shines bright. You have a fire that burns deep within you. Channel that fire to liberate the oppressed. Use it to speak up for the marginalized, the silenced, the disregarded, and the unheard. Know that wherever you go, you do not go alone. You are surrounded by a great cloud of witnesses. The blood of survivors, your ancestors who endured being kidnapped, being enslaved, and living under Jim and Jane Crow flows through your veins. Your Black Life Matters! Signed, Forever your Dad, The Talk Continued... Derrick Floyd Then Jacob called his sons, and said: “Gather around, that I may tell you what will happen to you in days to come. Assemble and hear, O sons of Jacob; listen to Israel, your father.” (Gen 49:1–2, NRSV) Dear Son, I’m sitting here thinking about our time together and all the great talks we so often have. I remember you asking me, why do we sit and have “the talk” after every situation in my life and every incident that becomes national news? I have often shared with you that my heart beats because of you. I will always protect you from any known or perceived threat. They are ever prevalent. My upbringing has governed why I do what I do with regard to you and our relationship. I grew up in the South, in a house of very loquacious people. I think we just loved to hear ourselves talk. It was refreshing. It still is. Moreover, the interesting dynamic was that we all had something to say. So we thought. Evenings were our favorite pastimes. We would clown with each other. We would level one put-down lovingly after another, but to hear my grandparents speak was the best. Seemingly the room stood still whenever they, my grandpa included, opened their mouths. It was always good, good words of wisdom. They would take a historically retrospective look through time. They would always take the time to remember whence they had come. It was almost prophetic to hear the things they had.d e vre se endured and the strides we had made as a country. It wasn’t unusual for my grandmother to r sth speak of great times, but in the same breath you would note the expressions of sadness that g ir llA.sre consumed her as she discussed where the world would end up. “Listen,” my grandma would h silb say with tears in her eyes, “Boy, you have to work twice as hard to be considered half as u P kco good. They ain’t gone give you nuttin.” And by “they,” I knew she and they meant White tS & people. As I got older, I suddenly realized that we were having “the Talk.” fp iW.9 Many years had passed... I was sitting and thinking one day. A quote by author Carol 1 0 2 © Moseley-Braun had consumed me. She writes, “Defining myself, as opposed to being th g iryp defined by others, is one of the most difficult challenges I face.”254 After sitting and o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. contemplating what she said, much to my chagrin, I suddenly became ashamed. I gloated quite often about being “woke.” I was one of the ones! In my mind, I understood the signs of the times. I knew what needed to happen, and I knew how to get it done. Somehow, Moseley- Braun’s words annihilated what was, in times past, my prize possession. My wokeness! My fantasy world and the idea that I had been a beacon of light to my African American male peers in every area of their lives was now in question. I had somehow forgotten to have the talk with them that I had with you, and that my dad and grandfather had with me. As your dad, and the principal of a predominantly African American school, I’ve always wanted to be “the guy” for my son, and my extended sons. It is the source of my strength. The root that held me together. Unlike you, I knew these young men did not have fathers in the home, and I was intentional about being a father to them. I too watch many of them struggle with self- identity and self-worth. They had no inkling of their worth. They did not know they were kings. Royalty coursed through their veins. Other people always defined us. Societal norms, past and present, are the culprits. Consequently, for us, it was easier to accept who they say we are. I saw them, my Black males, acquiesce to ideas of promiscuity, rap artist, athletes, and criminal intentions as the sum total of who they were. This is not our legacy. Will this be our history? Of course not. I will die sharing with my sons who they are. This darker hue has always come with it’s unique set of problems and assets. Carter Woodson says, “We should emphasize not Negro History, but the Negro in history. What we need is not a history of selected races or nations, but the history of the world void of national bias, race hate, and religious prejudice.”255 In Genesis chapter 49 of the Bible, Jacob stops dying so he can speak into the lives of his sons. He gathers them together around his bedside. He did not want to sleep with his fathers until he had prophesied to his sons. There were things he needed them to know. Jacob needed to have the talk with his sons. He wanted to speak into their lives and tell them what they would become before society had an opportunity to tell them all they couldn’t be. He longed to help his sons define themselves as opposed leaving that daunting task for someone else. He had to remind them of who their grandfather and great-grandfather were. Mickle in meaning, it was the nucleus of their existence. It parallels the father’s role in a Jewish bar mitzvah. Traditionally the father speaks into the life of his son. He prays a blessing over him to protect him as he enters into this new phase of life. In essence, he is prescriptively having.d the talk with his son before a crowd of witnesses. If you read the text, Israel (Jacob) has e vre se decided what he will do to preserve the lives of his sons, but the second verse—“Assemble r sth g and hear, O sons of Jacob; listen to Israel your father”—provides instructions for the sons. ir llA.sre When Jacob speaks, when he has the talk, they must be willing to listen to what he has to say. h silb Beleaguered from past hurts, ideologies, stigmatizations, and stereotypes, it seems hard for us u P kco to persevere. “I am what time, circumstances, history, have made me, certainly, but I am also, tS & fp much more than that. So are well all,” writes James Baldwin.256 This quote speaks to the iW.9 1 mind-set of a population. In this quote, Mr. Baldwin says (without saying it) that we are 0 2 © th products of our environment, but we are not prisoners to it. We are so much more than what g iryp “they” could ever imagine we would be. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. We think about the efforts that have been made to ensure that we as a people would have equal footing—the civil rights era comes to mind. Twelve percent of African Americans were actively involved in the civil rights movement. By sheer addition and subtraction, this means percent were watching from the sidelines. At a time in our history when things were do or 88 die, sink or swim, even life or death. Only 12 percent of those directly impacted were in direct action. Do you know what that means? That means a few people can make a huge difference when they are of one mind and one heart. To the contrary, it also means that most people will stand back and let the few take the risks that will affect the masses. Sad, yes. I am glad to be in the percent who is willing to make the sacrifice for our young men. I have 12 come to realize that the talk is not an easy one to have. I also realize that if no one ever has it, then you, my son and my brothers, will forever live by the words of those who would rather us be paupers in a kingdom that belongs to us. Remember, the talk is one aspect, but the listen is the part that will cultivate change. Knowledge isn’t power until it is applied. What we have experienced in the past few hundred years has been a testament to the hearts of men. Fear and uncertainty have governed our nation. “They” never understood us nor desired too. W. E. B. DuBois, in The Souls of Black Folk, says, “Herein lies the tragedy of the age: not that men are all poor—all men know something of poverty; not that men are all wicked—who is good? Not that men are ignorant—what is truth? Nay, but that men know so little of men.”257 The truth is marinated in this quote. Men know so little of men. I want you to continue to move in faith and ACTION. Move in the faith that I taught you. Not church faith. Church doesn’t call for action but that we simply believe blindly that God will do it. This is not the lesson I teach. Not completely understanding what God and the universe is implementing in our lives, we trust. We trust that the actions we will use to overthrow ideas, customs, antiquated thought processes dripping with racism are sanctioned and supported by God. And if not, we use the advocate we have with the Father. To you and to my brothers, the one constant we have is our commitment to each other as family, extended or otherwise. We may not all share the same, but we are family. Bereft of nothing, we have a unique bond that cannot be separated by time, distance, space, or the lack of understanding from others outside of our coalition. We support each other in good and bad times. We speak truth to each other, with the innate ability to call ourselves unto greatness. Iron sharpens iron. We speak truth to those who choose to believe the lie. We cultivate the.d man of valor that lies within. Prov 17:17 says, “A friend loveth at all times, but a brother is e vre se born for adversity.”258 We are morphing into a more excellent us. What I have you have. r sth g ir llA Your pain is my pain. Your joy is my joy. We bleed from the same vein and we drink from.sre the same cup. Nothing shall ever divide us. What I am you are, and what you are I am. Am I h silb my brother’s’ keeper? I am! Right now and always. We exist from this fiber. In Malcolm X’s u P kco tS speech “Prospects for Freedom,”259 he stood firmly and said, “You can’t separate peace from & fp iW freedom because no one can be at peace unless he has his freedom.”260 This fiber threads to.9 1 0 the freedom of your mind. Be liberated in thought. Be liberated in deed. Be liberated in what 2 © th you say. Jesus said, “It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that g iryp o C I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life” (John 6:63, KJV). I am grateful I had the Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. talk. I am grateful my fathers had the talk with me. It helped to shape what I would say to you and to my extended sons. Even though the talk was essential, I am even more thankful that I submitted to the listening. Jacob spoke well to his sons, but his sons also listened to what he had to say. It was because of the listen that I/we usually embraced the lesson. Love, Dad 242. Black students, boys, and students with disabilities were disproportionately disciplined (e.g., suspensions and expulsions) in K-12 public schools, according to GAO’s analysis of Department of Education (Education) national civil rights data for school year 2013–14, the most recent available (Government Accountability Office, “K–12 Education”). 243. Goff et al., “Essence of Innocence.” 244. Chetty, “Two Americas.” 245. Hoffman et al., “Racial Bias in Pain Assessment,” 113–16. 246. Green et al., “Unequal Burden of Pain.” 247. Walsh, “Cost of Inequality.” 248. Fowler, “Police Brutality Drove a Wedge.” 249. Coates, Between the World and Me, 19. 250. “The Black church” is widely understood to include the following seven major Black Protestant denominations: the National Baptist Convention, the National Baptist Convention of America, the Progressive National Convention, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, and the Church of God in Christ. 251. Institute for Women’s Policy Research, “Gender Wage Gap: 2017”; and Equal Rights Advocates, “Moving Women Forward.” 252. McMickle, Where Have All the Prophets Gone?, 8. 253. See Kennedy, “Engaging Millennials through the Tradition.” 254 Quoted in D’Orio, Carol Moseley-Braun, 63. 255. Woodson, “Celebration of Negro History Week” 256. Baldwin, “Preface to the 1984 Edition,” xii. 257. Du Bois, Souls of Black Folk, 226–27. 258. Ibid..d e 259. X, “Prospects for Freedom.” vre se r sth 260. Ibid., 152. g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 16 Changing the Subject Creating Caring Communities for Women Impacted by Abortion K W M C AREN ALKER- C LURE During a women’s Bible study one evening on the subject of forgiveness, one of the members (a middle-aged woman) said, “I can never ask God to forgive me for something I knew was wrong. I had two abortions when I was young, and I knew what I was doing. You can’t ask for forgiveness when you know what you were doing is wrong.” Her teacher (a woman minister) sat there flabbergasted and did not know how to respond to her statement. This is an excellent example which indicates that the church does not know how to respond to issues surrounding voluntary pregnancy termination, more commonly known as abortion. Maybe some ministers have preached from the pulpit that the Bible tells us, “Thou shalt not kill.” Therefore women should not have abortions. Or we may hear the church take a side—as either pro-life or pro-choice—in the abortion argument. However, the time has come to change the subject from whether or not one should have an abortion to how we minister to the millions of women who have had abortions and have kept a secret because they are ashamed of being judged, or because they believe they cannot ask for forgiveness because they “knew what they were doing.” When a child is stillborn, mothers are allowed to grieve. When a woman has a miscarriage, the parents are expected to grieve. When a baby lives for a short time and dies because of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), the mother is given sympathy and permitted to grieve. However, when a woman chooses to abort, some people think she does not have the right to grieve. Therefore she hides her pain and allows it to fester and manifest itself in many different ways. After experiencing abortion, some women feel that they are not worthy to be loved by a man. Some fear they will never have another child. Some feel that God is punishing them when bad things happen to them. In addition to the guilt, they also are.d e vre holding shame and embarrassment. se r sth Studies on both the pro-life and the pro-choice sides agree that trauma is associated with g ir llA.sre abortion.261 The loss of a child is very traumatic. Studies have shown that women who have h silb an abortion feel that they do not have the right to grieve because it was a decision they made. u P kco Therefore very few processes are in place to help a woman grieving from abortion. Many tS & times, if a woman reaches out for help in dealing with grief to the clinic where her abortion fp iW.9 was performed, she is told that her hormones are out of whack because of the procedure and 1 0 2 © that she will be fine in a few weeks. Or she may be told that she just has to live with the th g iryp decision she made. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. In her book Forbidden Grief: The Unspoken Pain of Abortion, coauthor Dr. Theresa Burke has said: Grief can be healing. It signals our living and feeling in connection with others. It represents our vulnerability, our humanity. When we remember and mourn our losses, we free our souls to move beyond the pain. This is the purpose of funerals. As difficult as they are, they provide a public expression of our grief, a way to say goodbye while surrounded by friends and loved ones, and a place to remember with dignity our lasting connections to one another. Women who undergo abortions are never permitted this social connection.262 Therefore because they have no way to publicly express grief over their lost child or to say goodbye, they must suffer in silence and in secret. I chose a church setting as the place of my context because the church has been silent on the issue of abortion. The church may speak out against abortion and teach that abortion is sin, but no one tells a mother or father about what to do after the abortion. No one says, “Because we know that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, this is how you can be helped even if you’ve done that. God loves you too.” There is a need for a ministry to address this issue so that persons can be restored in their relationship with God, or be introduced for the first time into a relationship with God. Many times, persons who have experienced abortion feel that they cannot talk to anyone. They may experience guilt, fear, and disappointment. They may sometimes feel that God would not want to have a relationship with them because of what they have done. The church does not minister to these persons, either individually or in a group. So no one is able to work through the pain and guilt even when so many women in our churches have experienced it. In my faith tradition, churches have ministries for those struggling with substance abuse and for those living with a substance abuser. They have ministries for single mothers, for children, and for men. Most recently there have been ministries popping up for women who are victims of domestic and sexual abuse. However, I do not know of any ministries that give women and men permission to grieve the loss of their aborted babies so they can be healed. Abortion is such a taboo subject; people are uncomfortable talking about it. Yet according to statistics one in four women have experienced an abortion, which means that a quarter of the.d e vre women sitting in our congregations have had abortions.263 Age does not matter. Some se r sth women have been carrying this guilt for over forty years, and some just recently had an g ir llA.sre abortion. Pastors have no problem providing pastoral care to persons who have lost a loved h silb one; but when it comes to providing care to those who have had an abortion, women and men u P kco have few places to go to grieve the loss of their child so that healing can begin. How can they tS & be restored to wholeness? The question is, how do we create safe places for persons to tell fp iW.9 and retell their stories so they can be liberated from the secrecy, shame, and guilt they have 1 0 2 © carried around for many years? th g iryp On this explorative journey, it has been stated repeatedly, “You must address your secrets o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. before you can be healed.” The late Dr. Emma Justes addresses keeping secrets in her book Please Don’t Tell. She discusses how secrets are often passed from generation to generation, and how damaging they can be. She indicates that the content of a secret is not the main problem; the problem is that keeping a secret can itself inflict damage on the one guarding the secret. The whole premise is that once a secret is shared, it no longer has the destructive power over you that it once had. Secrets have a hidden power over us because if we keep secrets, we live in fear that they may one day come out and shame us or spoil our good name. However, secrets have no power over us once they are shared. Once a secret is shared, you never have to worry about someone finding out.264 Many women who had abortions have kept that secret for many years. Abortions can be swept under the rug and no one will ever have to know what happened. In fact, the primary reason women have abortions is so that no one will know they were ever pregnant. Women have abortions for many different reasons. Perhaps they wish to conceal a pregnancy resulting from an extramarital relationship. Maybe they are very young and feel that they cannot care for a child. Perhaps they have been raped. Maybe they are unmarried. Or they may be in an uncommitted relationship with a partner who is not in favor of having a child. Or they may already have children and do not feel that they can care for another child. For instance, in the course of a conversation, one woman said, “You would be surprised at the number of women who are sitting in church every Sunday who have had abortions and are suffering in silence. I had an abortion, and I remember every time something bad happened to me I thought God was punishing me for murdering my child.” Another woman said, “I had an abortion when I was a young woman, and now I’ve never had any children. I have often wondered if God didn’t let me have any more children because he punished me for having the abortion.” It is not God’s intention that women should suffer because of their choices. God is a God of liberation, healing, and grace—not one who would desire that women live their lives in secrecy, shame, and guilt without the forgiveness of others or oneself. When we see how prevalent shame-held secrets are, and the pain with which they are held, we recognize the havoc these secrets create in the lives of individuals and families. Even church communities are not immune. “Kept secrets can deeply and negatively affect all the people they touch.”265 The Bible has always been a source of comfort and hope for those in need. The Old.d Testament scripture I selected for my biblical foundation within my doctoral dissertation is 2 e vre se Sam 11:26–27; 12:24. This particular narrative was selected because as I read the story of r sth g ir llA Bathsheba, I observed that she suffered significant losses in a short time and could have.sre experienced some issues of unresolved grief. She experienced an inordinate amount of grief h silb and suffering during a short period of time. Bathsheba was married to a soldier named Uriah. u P kco While he was at war, she slept with King David, found out she was pregnant, and sent word tS & fp back to the king. The king then had her husband murdered. After going through a brief period iW.9 1 of grief, Bathsheba was then taken into the king’s palace to be married to him. All in a matter 0 2 © th of a few months or so. g iryp What happens next is even more devastating. Second Samuel 11:27b lets us know that o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. God was displeased with what David had done and sent the prophet Nathan to give King David a parable about a rich man taking a poor man’s sheep. David thought the story was true and was incensed by the callousness of the rich man—only to find out the rich man represented himself and the poor man represented Uriah (Bathsheba’s slain husband). God’s punishment for the adulterous relationship and subsequent murder was that the child Bathsheba was carrying would die. David begged God not to take the baby’s life, but after a seven-day illness the baby died. Though the text does not tell us how Bathsheba grieved the loss of her firstborn, Sam says, “Then David comforted his wife Bathsheba and he went 2 11:24 to her and lay with her,” indicating that she grieved the loss of her baby. It is my assertion that Bathsheba may have had to deal with unresolved issues of grief over losing her husband, marrying his murderer, and then losing her firstborn. Grief unresolved is unhealthy grief. When ministering with women who have been impacted by abortion, this text will offer a biblical example of how circumstances that are shameful can be a stumbling block to healing. Although Bathsheba did not experience voluntary pregnancy termination, she had plenty of reasons to experience shame and guilt: These emotions could have easily arisen in response to her adulterous relationship, her pregnancy, the murder of her husband, her marriage to his murderer, or the loss of her child—or in response of all together. Anyone who had experienced such events as Bathsheba did without a faith community to aid in her healing could later experience unresolved grief, which might lead to unhealthy healing. Looking to a biblical example of someone who experienced shame and grief also shows us how many of our experiences that have brought us shame are also part of our biblical narrative. Yet even in the midst of suffering is a word of liberation and hope to bring us healing. For this word we turn to the Gospel of Matthew. The New Testament text is found in Matt 5:4 “Blessed are those who mourn for they will be comforted.” This text is found in what is called the Sermon on the Mount. I have selected it because of my desire to illustrate through the word of God that even though we may mourn, we can still be blessed. This text gives hope to those who mourn and even calls them blessed. It demonstrates hope and healing as an example of how Jesus views those in mourning, with his blessings. Matt directs us to 5:4 the ability to hope in the Lord that we can be blessed even as we mourn. In his Sermon on the Mount, one thing I found interesting about Jesus’ teaching is that those he says are blessed are not necessarily endowed with musical talent or artistic ability, they are not the highly intelligent or well educated. Those he is calling blessed are the poor in spirit, those who.d e vre se mourn. Those Jesus is calling blessed hardly seem to be blessed in this world’s view. As we r sth “change the subject,” this text is a starting place from which to search of other biblical g ir llA.sre examples of how God loves, cares for, and forgives those whom others have deemed h silb outcasts. This chapter, titled “Changing the Subject,” highlights biblical examples of healing u P kco and hope for those who have lost the hope that they are loved and cared for by God or the tS & church community. fp iW.9 As I began my research on this subject, I was surprised to find that abortions were 1 0 2 © practiced in ancient Greece and Rome. In antiquity, concerns about abortion were rarely, if at th g iryp all regarding the fetus because the fetus was not considered a human. Concerns were more o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. for the health and welfare of the mother and the father. From the earliest days of ancient Greece and Rome; voluntary pregnancy termination was more common among the wealthy than among the poor. Motives for obtaining an abortion were no less varied in antiquity than they are today. However, many times rich women were motivated to have abortions because they did not want to share their wealth with “lower-class children” fathered illegitimately. Another motivation for rich women to abort was their desire to preserve their sex appeal, and not wanting to lose their figures by having babies.266 Methods for voluntary pregnancy termination also varied in antiquity. Some women took poisons, some took mixtures of herbs and alcohol; still others used mechanical methods to cause abortion. Some women chose to bind their bodies tightly around the womb while others struck the womb in an attempt to expel the fetus. Other methods used abortive instruments.267 In 1973, the landmark Roe v. Wade decision impacted abortion laws in the United States. The law came into being as a result of a Texas woman who alleged that she had been raped and was denied the right to have a legal abortion. The case traveled from the Texas courts to the Supreme Court. However, the case took so long that as her pregnancy proceeded, she made the decision to have the baby. This case has had an impact on laws that are still in effect today. In Roe v. Wade the Supreme Court decided that during the first trimester of a pregnancy the state cannot prohibit abortion in any way. During the second trimester, the state can prohibit an abortion only if the procedure will endanger the health of the fetus or mother. In the third trimester, the Court said, the state can completely prohibit an abortion if the fetus is viable, in order to protect the fetus.268 History sets the tone in the evolution and dynamics surrounding issues specific to women. As individual women come to recognize that they are not the first to experience shame, guilt, and unforgiveness after having an abortion, together they will begin to build healing communities in which they can uncover and share their secrets and their shame in order to find wholeness. The God of hope and liberation brings us to our next section as we explore ways to change the subject from the God who judges and punishes to the God who liberates and heals. It is my opinion that all too often women, especially African American women, who have voluntarily terminated their pregnancies, end up suffering needlessly because of the secrets,.d e shame, and guilt associated with the sin of abortion preached, taught and lived out in many vre se r sth faith traditions. I believe the time has come to change the subject. g ir llA The question becomes, how do we create safe places for women to tell and retell their.sre stories so they can be liberated from the secrecy, shame, and guilt that they have carried h silb u around for many years? I believe that it is not God’s intention that women should suffer P kco tS because of this choice they have made. God is a God of liberation, healing, and grace—not & fp one who desires that women live their lives in secrecy, shame and guilt, without the iW.9 1 forgiveness of others or of oneself. 0 2 © th The church has been our way to find liberation from our oppression and oppressors. Many g iryp o men and women have found hope in the Black church when there was no other way. Yet the C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. discourse of Black liberation, womanist, and confessional theology really set the framework for my theological position. My theological position has been influenced by the voices of James Cone and Dwight Hopkins (liberation theologians), as well as womanist theologians Stephanie Mitchem, Alice Walker, and Linda Hollies. Finally, the voice of Dr. Frank Thomas, who introduced to me confessional theology—our faith seeking understanding as we admit and confess our faults one to another and so free ourselves up to openly acknowledge that we are not perfect. These theological discourses have helped me to develop my position. In addition to the voices of theologians, also the voices of grief counselors, therapists, and psychologists informed my theoretical foundation for this chapter. Pastoral care professionals who are experts in grief counseling, therapists who have done extensive research on the subject of the unspoken pain of abortion and professionals who argue against any psychological or physical challenges associated with abortion also informed my project. In the book titled All Our Losses, All Our Grief, the authors indicate that since no two occasions for grieving are exactly the same, grief is always a response to the particular loss of whatever the object is.”269 In other words, an individual’s grief is primarily related to the particular loss, and though people grieve differently, some similarities emerge in the way people grieve. In Sisters of the Yam, bell hooks notes the ways that African Americans experience death and shows how these differ from the ways Caucasians grieve. She observes from her life’s experiences that death in Black culture was a time not only for grieving but for rejoicing. “The Home Going Celebration” is a time in which to celebrate the life of your loved one but also to openly grieve your loss. Dr. hooks also indicates that in the African American community, death is one of the rare moments when it is socially acceptable for folks to let go emotionally. Mourning a death we can break down and surrender to grief. Healthy grieving is important to the process of emotional healing after a loss.270 That is why it is essential for persons impacted by voluntary pregnancy termination be given the opportunity to grieve. Pastoral care professional Ed Wimberly in his book Moving from Shame to Self-Worth271 recommends that telling our stories is one way to find healing, along with telling biblical stories and preaching. Wimberly indicates that changing views that people bring to events and relationships can be known through storytelling. Wimberly suggests that stories should.d e be told in a way that grieving persons will be able to see themselves and their circumstances vre se r sth differently. He also indicated that biblical stories can assist in healing by presenting them in a g ir llA way in which the hearer will be able to see themselves in the text..sre Both clinical and pastoral care professionals have indicated that telling stories—biblical as h silb u well as personal—to grieving persons is an effective way of showing care. Consequently, P kco tS each of these foundations has played a specific role in educating, as well as offering & fp theological, biblical, and theoretical perspectives to significantly change the subject from iW.9 1 guilt and shame to healing and hope for a future. These foundations offer a holistic approach 0 2 © th to healing in mind, body, and spirit. g iryp o The setting chosen for my doctoral project was a weekend retreat. During the retreat, C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. participants were encouraged to tell their stories of grief, shame, and guilt, and they were given the opportunity to hear biblical narratives that illustrated divine healing and transformation. While participants heard these biblical stories, they were guided to notice how they might find themselves or parts of their story within the ancient narratives. Finally, a memorial service provided retreat participants with a safe place to grieve and bring closure to their significant losses. The impact of unresolved grief can be devastating over many years. I dedicate this chapter to the countless women and men who have been impacted by the guilt and shame of voluntary pregnancy termination and have kept it a secret. It is my prayer that God will point them in the direction of sharing their stories in a safe place where they can find divine healing and forgiveness on their journey together. It is also my desire that this chapter will compel readers to offer ministries within their churches in order to bring healing to those sitting in their congregations secretly suffering in silence. 261. See, e.g., Burke and Reardon, Forbidden Grief; and Babbel, “Post Abortion Stress Syndrome.” 262. Burke and Reardon, Forbidden Grief, 64. 263. Guttmacher Institute, “United States: Abortion.” 264. Justes, Please Don’t Tell, 4. 265. Ibid. 266. Gorman, Abortion & the Early Church, 14. 267. Ibid., 15. 268. Blanchard, Anti-Abortion Movement, 125. 269. Mitchell and Anderson, All Our Losses, 53. 270. hooks, Sisters of the Yam, 101. 271. Wimberly, Moving from Shame to Self-Worth, 75..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.