are on the rise. The calls are motivated instinctively by a desire to remind African Americans that they are forever in a system that sees them as less than human, undeserving of equal rights, and never fully liberated. These ideologies last existed during the period of African enslavement in the United States. Maybe the mission of some European Americans is to go back to that time period. Or maybe we never really left. 18. Wormwood, “How Feelings Guide.” 19. Hanson, “What Makes You Feel Threatened?” 20. Wormwood, “How Feelings Guide.” 21. Weaver, “Why White People Keep Calling the Cops.” 22. Ibid. 23. Ibid. 24. Johnson, interview. 25. Ibid. 26. Weaver, “Why White People Keep Calling the Cops.” 27. Ibid. 28. Jeffrey, “School Shootings in U.S.” 29. Males, “White People Should Be More Afraid.” 30. Ibid. 31. Ibid. 32. Ibid. 33. Ibid..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 3 Brown Lives Matter The Demonization of Immigrants, Refugees, and Asylum Seekers Is Not New M J G ARIELA ANELLE ONZALEZ The demonization of immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers is not new. As early as 1775 Benjamin Franklin wrote warnings of German immigrants. Whatever group is already present can succumb to nativism and become suspicious of outsiders. In the 1800s propaganda spread against Irish, German, and Chinese immigrants.34 Later, in the 1940s, President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered the internment of Japanese Americans. In Korematsu v. the U.S., the Supreme Court in a 6–3 ruling upheld the constitutionality of the government to hold its citizens in internment. Justice Robert Jackson provided a dissent, however, pointing out the behavior of Korematsu was not usually criminal. “‘Korematsu... has been convicted of an act not commonly thought a crime. It consists merely of being present in the state whereof he is a citizen, near the place where he was born, and where all his life he has lived.’ The nation’s wartime security concerns, he contended, were not adequate to strip Korematsu and the other internees of their constitutionally protected civil rights.”35 The reasoning of this dissent is pertinent to the current conditions because seeking asylum at an entry point is also not criminal; however, the current policy is to block asylum seekers because of an irrational fear that noncitizens of the United States pose threats to U.S. citizens. A legal team reopened the Korematsu case in 1983. “They showed that the government’s legal team had intentionally suppressed or destroyed evidence from government intelligence agencies reporting that Japanese Americans posed no military threat to the U.S.”36 The justification for interning present-day immigrants or noncitizens ignores statistics that show that the likelihood is low that immigrants or noncitizens will threaten U.S. citizens.37.d Also, the demand during the s that Japanese Americans prove themselves certified loyal e vre 1940 se is echoed in the insistence today on a certain reaction to the U.S. flag and the national r sth g ir llA anthem. The vilification of athletes for taking a knee in order to draw attention to police.sre brutality and other unjust actions by law enforcement is the product of a regime with h silb authoritarian tendencies. u P kco The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) began in 2003 in conjunction with tS & fp the Homeland Security Act. By its founding in connection with antiterrorism, ICE conflated iW.9 1 immigration with threats to security and with criminality. In 2003 the perpetual War on 0 2 © th Terror was young, and many politicians, and some news outlets spread a narrative of fear of g iryp o brown-skinned immigrants, particularly persons of the Muslim faith. Due to this fear, ICE C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. gained more control at borders and entry points. “ICE was granted a unique combination of civil and criminal authorities.”38 Through the past fifteen years the agency expanded, ramping up its focus on the southwest border. The so-called threat need not be terrorism to be an ICE issue. Any safety issue that can be pinned on those outside the U.S. could succumb to ICE’s expanding power. To be emphatic, ICE does not exist to provide care and compassion for refugees and asylum seeking neighbors; nevertheless, care and compassion is the humanitarian response that persons fleeing from war, crime, and abuse need. In its very foundation ICE perpetuates the fear of brown-skinned Muslim immigrants, and this relates to fear of brown-skinned Mexican, Central American, and South American immigrants because of White fragility. During the Obama administration, unaccompanied minors were detained, and families were detained together. Many were asylum seekers, fleeing turmoil in Central America. In 2015 the Flores Settlement was reviewed for its application in the care of immigrant detainees. There was some improvement due to legal aid and human rights advocacy, and because the volume of immigrants took a downward trend. Also during his administration, President Obama advocated for the Dream Act, finding a path to citizenship, eventually signing the order to establish Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals. With ICE still in play, we can’t say mistreatment completely went away. Racism is woven in the fabric of enforcement agencies like ICE (and the police). Throughout this nation’s history there have been waves of nationalism. This relates to whiteness because white supremacy is in the foundation of who is a citizen. The Naturalization Act of 1790 allowed citizenship for free White people who had lived in the country for two years. With the emancipation proclamation, African Americans were granted citizenship. Quickly, White supremacist groups made efforts to roll back the rights of Black folk. In 1924 the first immigration quota laws were put in place, favoring persons from northern and western Europe. Asian, Latinx and Hispanic, and Indigenous people were also systematically shut out of citizenship and its rights, including land ownership, and participation in the justice system—e.g., giving testimony, serving on a jury, or having a jury of peers.39 While there have been some strides forward in rights for people of color, the current administration essentially promises to make things worse. On the campaign trail, now president Donald Trump said that people from Mexico were.d e bringing crime and drugs, and that they were rapists.40 He also called for a complete vre se r sth shutdown on immigration from majority Muslim-faith nations. Not only has Trump been g ir llA worried about non-U.S. Muslims, but he has mentioned surveillance of mosques within U.S..sre borders, stating in an interview, “‘You have to deal with the mosques, whether we like it or h silb u not. I mean, you know, these attacks aren’t coming out of—they’re not done by Swedish P kco tS people.’”41 This leads me to suspect that President Trump believes that White people are & fp iW better than people of color. Trump supporters have literally said as much. (Trump gained.9 1 0 traction in politics by lending his voice to the birther movement, which is the racially 2 © th motivated questioning of President Barack Obama’s legitimacy as a U.S. citizen.) In January g iryp o C 2018 in a bipartisan meeting, President Trump referred to African nations, Haiti, and El Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. Salvador with a crass epithet. A source who attended that meeting reported, “When the group came to discussing immigration from Africa, Trump asked why America would want immigrants from ‘all these shithole countries’ and that the U.S. should have more people coming in from places like Norway.”42 It is not a leap to deduce that according to President Trump, White people from places like Norway and Sweden are welcome, but Black and Brown people are meant to be shut out. Black and Brown people are deemed nefarious outsiders, or to quote President Trump, “bad hombres.” Recently, children—including toddlers—were separated from parents who are entering the country. “Under the zero-tolerance policy, cases that had been handled administratively in immigration court were now prosecuted as misdemeanors or felonies in federal court. Migrants were charged with crossing the border illegally and separated from their children, who were placed in shelters.”43 According to a former caseworker at a Tuscon shelter, their facility and staff are not equipped to handle the influx of youths. This is in part because of the volume of persons now requiring care. Furthermore, spaces were designed for transient care but are forced to operate long-term. Caseworkers may not be educated and experienced in type of care needed after the trauma of forced family separation.44 Due to lack of capacity and the desire to control a population—which the rhetoric characterized as dangerous, dehumanized “illegals”—the conditions meeting immigrant youths are prison-like rather than a compassionate refuge. In mid-June 2018, President Trump signed an executive order to cease family separations.45 However, there is no clear plan to reunite families, the harsh stance on immigration continues, and there is potential to detain families indefinitely. Underlying and purposeful systemic racism contribute to this justice issue. A police officer views a Black man with a cell phone as a criminal with a weapon because the officer has implicit bias against the man’s Black skin tone. Similarly, Brown-skinned people are viewed as threats to White America’s homeland. The prejudice toward Brown folks occurs at the same time as anti-Blackness racism by emboldened White supremacists. In the age of declaring Black Lives Matter, we can gain momentum by breaking down White supremacy at the points that it also attacks Brown brothers and sisters. The Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke about resisting oppression in its multiple forms in his speech “Beyond Vietnam.” He drew criticism for taking focus away from the civil rights of Black people. Still, Rev. Dr. King recognized we are called to compassion wherever it is needed. He saw.d e his task not in gaining only certain rights for some people, but he envisioned complete vre se r sth liberation: g ir llA.sre Beyond the calling of race or nation or creed is this vocation of sonship and h silb u brotherhood. Because I believe that the Father is deeply concerned, especially P kco for His suffering and helpless and outcast children, I come tonight to speak for tS & fp them. This I believe to be the privilege and the burden of all of us who deem iW.9 1 ourselves bound by allegiances and loyalties which are broader and deeper than 0 2 © th nationalism and which go beyond our nation’s self-defined goals and positions. g iryp o We are called to speak for the weak, for the voiceless, for the victims of our C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. nation, for those it calls “enemy,” for no document from human hands can make these humans any less our brothers.46 Here is our opportunity for spiritual care. Faith leaders can respond on three levels. These levels are adapted from human resource practice, and are matched with a spiritual care element inspired by the Christian faith tradition. These levels of response are macro or prophetic, mid or apostolic, and micro or pastoral. In this way spiritual care extends from systemic change to group dynamics management to direct care for individuals and back again. The macro/prophetic tasks include demonstrating, advocating, educating, and lobbying. The mid/apostolic tasks include analyzing, making policies, managing solutions at the local level, and anticipating problems and successes. The micro/pastoral tasks include rescuing, caring, teaching, empowering, and making and fulfilling referrals. Let’s unpack each area. The prophetic care is that of social justice. The goal is to call out oppression, and at the same time to call in the people to break free from the oppressive system. This occurs at least through the above-mentioned tasks. Demonstrating may take the form of marches and rallies, or raising public demand through media. The point is to draw attention to one’s cause. Prophetic voices speak to how the world is, and how the world could be. Advocating on the macro level is the attempt to give voice to a group of people. An advocate might effectively kick a door in, and then step aside, all the while saying, look and listen to the people that the powers that be have deemed lesser. Or an advocate might start with stepping aside, pushing back the loudmouths and liars with themself. (Listen to Black women. They create justice movements, like #Black Lives Matter and #MeToo.) Educating is introducing knowledge and awareness. This might be through well-researched writing or may mean marginalized perspectives come to the forefront. Lobbying combines and utilizes strengths and resources to influence. Boycotting is also an option, and I’m starting to think of it as reverse lobbying. When Attorney General Jeff Sessions reasoned for separating families using a New Testament scripture that called for law abiding, Christian faith leaders responded with more astute homiletics. They pointed out that in the gospels Jesus said, when we don’t welcome the stranger we do not welcome him. Many churches denounced Sessions’s statements and the Trump immigration policy. Rev. John Dorhauer, United Church of Christ president, called out the injustice and called on constituents to take action with these words, “As a faith leader,.d e vre I say without equivocation there is nothing remotely humane in this policy. It is beyond sinful se r sth —it is evil. I call on all leaders of our church to contact their representatives. Ask them not to g ir llA.sre abdicate their responsibility. Tell them not to fund this atrocity. Tell them to use their power, h silb their voice, and your vote to repeal this morally repugnant policy immediately.”47 u P kco Apostolic care is again concerned with social justice, this time with affinity for groups and tS & fp relationships. The analyzing on this level might involve noticing trauma symptoms in iW.9 children who are forcibly separated from their families. One may further analyze how 1 0 2 © migrant families as a whole have dealt with violence and turmoil along their entire journey. th g iryp There’s also room for social-historical analysis, like questioning what political parties, laws, o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. and other events contribute to the way things are today. The mid-level justice worker wants to implement concrete steps between the monumental call for justice and a person’s experienced freedom. They are answering what policies can bring change, and what will be the interconnected reactions. Apostles think of systems like bodies, and can break down how each group plays its part in a system. They will be able to identify the gifts, talents, and skills as well as growing edges. Then the goal is to coach or manage the body to solve its problems and function. The American Civil Liberties Union, or ACLU, practices practical activism. The ACLU reviews cases of small groups or individuals, attending to how these cases impact greater justice issues. They fact-check statements made by the Trump administration, like the claim that Trump’s immigration policy is enforcing a law that Democrats are responsible for.48 The ACLU compares the content of the Flores Settlement (which sets conditions for under what circumstances and for how long the U.S. government can detain immigrant children) with politicians’ claims.49 They look to implement solutions like class action lawsuits. In such lawsuits, they consider a myriad of family situations and worked toward the best outcome for their clients. In its statement, we see how the ACLU focuses on interconnected groups. “The ACLU is actively working in the courts, in Congress and in communities to stop this once and for all.”50 Pastoral care includes justice with a shift in focus toward healing. This might start with getting an individual or family to a safe space, essentially rescuing them. Caring includes pastoral interventions such support, reassurance, and addressing violations. The microlevel approach of teaching emphasizes lessons for the individual or for a close-knit group, while also keeping the context in mind. The point is to teach, on the microlevel, the prophetic lessons from the whole system: like, what is the meaning of this injustice to you personally? Resources are assessed, and the pastor empowers a path forward that draws from those strengths. The pastoral helper sees the details on the individual or personal level. The helper designs a specific approach to meet the need or needs, which might involve experts from other fields. The pastoral helper will make referrals to other direct care providers, and ministry becomes interdisciplinary work. Referrals that involve other experts expand the resources for the person in need. Micropractice or pastoral work is done by direct care providers, like social workers,.d e mental health aides, lawyers, and the like. There are possibilities for many individuals to vre se r sth directly show care. Senator Dick Durbin, from Illinois, got an idea from his granddaughter— g ir llA to deliver notes of encouragement to children in shelters.51 With these acts of kindness, kids.sre can know they are facing the difficulty of the detainment with love and support from a h silb u P community. kco tS Through my Latinx heritage I feel connected to this community of Brown folks. Still, I & fp iW have not lived the Latinx and Hispanic or immigrant experience. I am Puerto Rican, so my.9 1 0 family lives with the help and harm of coming from a U.S. colony. (The economic policies 2 © th and slow recovery after the 2017 hurricanes feels telling of our determined worth as g iryp o C Americans.) It is possible that my Hispanic last name will have me dropped from the voter Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. registration rolls. This has happened to others. I worry that at some point there will be a policy mandating that anyone with Latinx heritage is dangerous and should be displaced. Even so, so many of us are already impacted and will be affected if the oppression continues. I am European American on my mother’s side. Sometimes it is easy to blend into Whiteness when I’m tired of being exoticized, tokenized, or excluded. But in times of injustice I put aside that tired feeling. I know my ancestry includes colonization and slaughter, on the giving and receiving ends. And I wrestle with that identity in myself. So, I research history and current events. Then I think about how to be on the side of justice with the divine, and how to engage the world prophetically, apostolically, and pastorally. 34. Hernandez, “Brief History of Anti-immigrant Propaganda.” 35. “Facts and Case Summary—Korematsu v. U.S.” 36. Ibid. 37. Horsley, “Fact Check: Trump Illegal Immigration, and Crime.” 38. “Facts and Case Summary—Korematsu v. U.S.” 39. Smith et al., dirs., Race. 40. Phillips, “‘They’re Rapists’.” 41. Solis, “Six anti-Muslim Comments.” 42. Vitali, et al. “Trump Referred to Haiti and African Nations.” 43. Hennesy-Fiske, “‘Prison-Like’ Migrant Youth Shelter.” 44. Ibid. 45. Shear et al., “Trump Retreats on Separating Families.” 46. King, “Beyond Vietnam.” 47. Larkman, “UCC Leaders.” 48. Cheng, “Fact-Checking Family Separation.” Trump’s claim that Democrats are to blame for the family separation policy was issued by tweet. The ACLU article links a tweet from @realDonaldTrump at 4:58 a.m. on June 5, 2018, via Twitter.com/. 49. Elkin and Smith, “What Is the Flores Settlement?” 50. American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), “Fuel the Fight.”.d e 51. NBC-5 Chicago News,“Chicago Senator, Kids Make Cards.” vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 4 When the Movement Gives Back Julian DeShazier and Damon A. Williams It may well be that we will have to repent in this generation. Not merely for the vitriolic words and the violent actions of the bad people, but for the appalling silence and indifference of the good people who sit around and say, “Wait on time.” —MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. “Stay Woke” is a powerful image. Constantly alert. Eyes open. Paying attention. Ready to respond. Powerful and poetic—ironic, perhaps—in that “Stay Woke” echoes the charge laced throughout biblical texts (Matt 24:42–43; Mark 13:23, 33—“Be alert! You never know when the day will come”; 1 Thess 5:6—“Let us not fall asleep like others do... keep awake and be sober”; Rev 16:15—“Blessed is the one who is awake and clothed”; among many other examples), yet the phrase was born not in the church but from within #BlackLivesMatter, a campaign that is decidedly and intentionally—that is, strategically—distant from the traditional, faith-based activism of twentieth-century movements. That the worlds of church (not a monolith) and activist (not a monolith) are so often moving in different orbits yet are bound by such compelling language is a beautiful irony. It is necessary to say a third (perhaps obvious) thing about “Stay Woke”: it is exhausting. In the most literal sense: picture the famous scene of young Alex DeLarge in the film A Clockwork Orange, his eyes pried open and being forced to watch images of pain and suffering on a timeless loop, as punishment for his youthful enthusiasm gone too far. Our body hurts for him. Now imagine staying awake for even thirty-six straight hours (!), the weight of one’s face, the sag of the entire body, and the damp feeling that fatigue introduces to the body. “Woke” is a visceral, physical reality. And return to this call—no, mandate—to perpetual (“STAY”) awareness and readiness.d e (“WOKE”). The Activist-as-Composer is so prepared to respond to the discordia of injustice vre se r sth that one never manages to create a rhythm for oneself: the talented composer never gets to g ir llA craft from a clean tablature but must always correct the cacophony of abusive power. Activist.sre is by definition a pattern of reactivity, of shaping the world through negative definitions h silb u —“This thing they have done is NOT the way the world should be”—and it is wearisome. P kco tS Burnout is real within the activist community. So much so, that those thinking about the & fp health of activists (“advocates for advocates”) have begun to talk about something called iW.9 1 “sustainable activism”: an approach that calls for the long-term health of both the cause but 0 2 © th most importantly, the advocate. Think of it this way: if a boxer receives built-in rest between g iryp o three-minute rounds of boxing, then why not the freedom fighter? C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. And for these periods of self-care—of receiving therapy, of reflecting on action, of rest—it is commendable that people of faith outside the leadership of this iteration of “the movement”—people from churches called clergy and chaplains and laypeople—would want to offer respite, to offer a connection beyond language, and this entire book illustrates the excitement around this possibility. Let us go one step further than commendable, however: churches are more suited than any other civic institution to offer spiritual care to the weary activists of this world. The very first churches were curated as safe spaces for the afflicted and oppressed throughout the Roman Empire: as much as they were sacred spaces they were social locations for community and healing and inspiration. Church began as an ethos and grew into an institution simply by being so effective at conveying a worldview that it had to move into a separate building to give a few gracious hosts their living rooms back. The church and activist worlds were separated as a circumstance of history; this separation was reinforced by questionable decisions by an organized and empowered Christianity—and now it feels appropriate to ask whether and how a few justice-minded faithfolk can make amends and offer care to activists in these times. They have more in common than we tend to articulate. For example: clergy know about burnout, too. The lives of pastors and chaplains are, too, constantly undone by tragedy that requires an immediate response. So too are the rhythms of pastoral life hard to ascertain. It is a life in jazz: constant improvisation. And many spiritual caregivers burn out quickly, or their loving relationships do, or their healthy practices do. *However, the stats floating around the internet about pastors leaving ministry in record numbers are suspect. Seminary enrollment seems to decline at about 1 percent a year, on par with other degree programs, and ten new seminaries have been accredited by Association of Theological Schools (the primary accrediting body) since 2010. Nothing seems to indicate a shortage of pastors; it is probably more accurate to describe a shortage of jobs available. These beautiful ironies and the possibilities therein form the preamble to our primary goal in this chapter: to allow two passionate, vulnerable and curious practitioners in their respective fields—a pastor and an organizer, both in Chicago, both practicing in the heart of an active movement for black life, and both hopeful and cautious about the potential for partnership—to examine the question of the church’s current capacity to offer spiritual care to the Black Lives Matter movement. It is also our hope to describe, from within both church.d e vre se and activist contexts what can be done to expand the church’s capacity. r sth What we believe is this: while the church has much to offer toward the spiritual health and g ir llA.sre regeneration of activists, this potential will not be realized in its fullness until the church h silb takes a few lessons from the activists and re-forms itself in some vital ways. Inasmuch as the u P kco church can offer healing, aspects of the movement can heal the church. The healing we seek tS & is reciprocal. fp iW.9 1 0 2 © Why Is Capacity a Question? th g iryp o C Every care relationship, whether spiritual (e.g., serving as someone’s pastor) or otherwise Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. (e.g., serving as someone’s doctor or lawyer) begins and ends with trust. A person with a broken foot depends upon a skilled practitioner to properly diagnose and treat that injury. Primum non nocere, or nonmaleficence (“Do no harm”) is the fundamental reminder to every medical student, and our basic trust in the efficacy of their training under this practice fuels the healthcare industry. (Whether it can be called healthcare or not, is a different debate.) We want our doctors to follow protocol, to not guess about what may be wrong but to use their years of training and knowledge. And above all, we want our doctors to be healthy themselves. Anything less feels like a breach of trust. The same is true with people and their pastors. No one seeking forgiveness or clarity on the most intimate of issues wants to see their pastor engaged in unethical behavior or teaching outside of the tradition or straying from the teachings of the Bible in their own lives. Any of these would constitute malpractice—a breach of trust—and would be grounds for ending a relationship. This is the predicament of the Christian church right now as it pertains to the Black Life movement. As younger activists have mobilized against capitalism and militarism and diabolical racism, and have rallied the voices and leadership of society’s most marginalized —Black, Women, Trans, Queer—they have also noticed that one of society’s most impactful institutions, the church, has failed to do these things. Again, “church” is not a monolith, but, on the whole, the leadership and ethos of this iteration of the movement has not aligned with most church structures and visions. The quote at the beginning of this chapter then becomes even more elucidatory: it was the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.—a pastor himself— who raised this indictment against his “fellow clergymen” and called for a new order of operations inside religious institutions.52 (The subsequent mythologization of King, and its consequences, is a concern we will address momentarily.) The church’s participation in capitalism—and silence around militarism and racism—calls into question its capacity to offer spiritual care. Although most congregations remain a location for much-needed charity, it is no longer the case that the most vulnerable can feel most safe inside a sanctuary. The public has cried, “Malpractice!” and the breach of trust is felt in the activists’ reluctance to call upon pastors to speak or offer spiritual care when being woke is most tiring. There is a Black Life movement that is leading the cause of wellness for teens, LGBTQ.d people, women, the poor and working class, students—and most of their organizers are not e vre se on the front lines wearing collars or citing scriptures. Something has been broken in the r sth g language and practice of the church, which is the literal way of saying what the apostle Paul ir llA.sre said in his first letter to the Corinthians: “Many have fallen asleep” ( 1 Cor 11:30). h silb u P kco Church Confronting Itself tS & fp iW On April 4, 2018—the fiftieth anniversary of the assassination of MLK—the National.9 1 0 2 Council of Churches convened spiritual leaders from across the globe to Washington DC’s © th g National Mall for a rally to end racism. Seems typical enough: Racism exists; let’s yell at it. iryp o C But something was different about this rally. All the speakers asked to wax poetic and Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. prophetic about the legacy of King were invited to do so under one prompt, one condition: talk about your own complicity in these pervasive systems of oppression and dehumanization. This was no mere idol worship. What resulted was a refreshing series of confessionals and minisermons pointed not at the White House but at church practice, indicting everything from lack of imagination from church leaders and a dearth of community partnerships to outright cowardice. The event remained primarily symbolic—that is, after all, the prima facie purpose of rallies—but the tone was significant in that denominational leaders were finally showing a willingness to live out Matthew 7 and deal with the plank in their own eye before calling out the speck in others’. To do this work—of offering care to people broken by injustice—beyond the rally experience will require two shifts that may change what it means to be church in this day and age: a shift in language and a shift in leadership. Lessons, questions, and tools from the movement will guide the way. Shifting Language The legacy of twentieth-century social movements includes a deep relationship with the church. The Black Church in particular—the institution congregated primarily by African Americans and espousing the values and freedom of Black Americans—has been a haven and resting place for those involved in the struggle for justice. The examples are too many to cite, but due credit belongs to Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama; Olivet Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois; Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia; First Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama; and several other locations—not all of them Baptist—which opened their doors to the people and made space for the movement as it was being born. These congregations were more than mere “meeting houses.” As E. Franklin Frazier describes in The Negro Church in America, “Negroes were captured and enslaved and inducted into the plantation regime [which] tended to loosen all social bonds among them and to destroy the traditional basis of social cohesion,” and Black churches served as a distinct institutional presence to counter this. While colored people were being torn apart by poverty and racism, the Black Church was a trusted holding place where grief and hope and.d e social cohesion were held as the highest values; the sanctuary was an unassailable, safe vre se r sth place. g ir llA We must not underestimate the role of language in creating this safety. After all, church.sre was a space where, if your boss had been cruel or you had been dehumanized up and down h silb u the block all week, on Sunday you were certain to hear that you are a beloved child of God. P kco tS If you had to keep your mouth shut about ills perpetrated against you in order to protect your & fp iW family, it was in church where you could sing the beautiful lament of “Come Sunday”:.9 1 0 “Lord, dear Lord above, / God Almighty, God of Love, / Please look down and see my people 2 © th through.” Or you could simply moan with, as Paul says in Romans, “sighs too deep for g iryp o C words.” The point is, it mattered that what you were hearing and were able to say inside of Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. church was different from what you heard and how you could speak outside of church. It was a holy language, set apart from the rhythm of everyday life, which allowed for the type of cohesion that gives birth to movements. The church did not invite the movement through its doors: through its language of affirmation and challenge, the church became an incubator for a movement that was still figuring itself out and constantly reeling as it moved to respond to every tragedy. We can say the same thing about the Black Lives Matter movement today. The difference is, many Black churches are espousing a capitalist gospel of prosperity, which not only flows downstream along with cultural trends but also supports the machinations of an exploitative model of economic growth tied into one’s faith. If people are wondering why the activists are not calling on the church, the answer is obvious: many churches are speaking the radical opposite from the values espoused by the movement. The intention is not to call out pastors but for all potential spiritual caregivers to ask: Does the gospel we preach and live protect the most vulnerable in our communities, or does it medicate them and further empower oppressive practices? When activist collectives perceive the church empowering oppressive practices, the church will not be able to offer the kind of spiritual care that activists most need. Nonviolent vs. Antiviolent Blink two times if you’ve ever used the phrase “nonviolent direct action” to describe your work. It is an important phrase and strategy, and has had such affect and effect that every direct action campaign, even the ones that use violence as a strategy, must respond to nonviolence as the organizing status quo. But there’s a problem with that word: nonviolence. The legacy of violence perpetuated against Black communities is astounding, and it has existed for as long as Black people have been in America. It is so pervasive that violence is almost seen as pathological in Black realities. To counter this, activists around the beginning of the twentieth century began using the term nonviolence as a way to describe a response to injustice (and outright violence) that did not beget more violence. Its roots come from the practice of ahimsa, one of the core principles of Buddhism and Hinduism, which commands.d e respect for all life as a logical extension of self-respect and self-love. vre se r sth The problem is that these understandings of nonviolence are often too simplistic and rarely g ir llA offer up a definition of violence beyond “hurting the body of another person.”53.sre h The World Health Organization defines violence as “the intentional use of physical force silb u P or power threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or kco tS community, which either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, & fp iW psychological harm, maldevelopment, or deprivation.”54 Because force and power are of.9 1 0 2 themselves neutral, it is important to look at the word intentional: the use of force or power © th g iryp with the intent to harm. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. With this expanded and perhaps enlightened definition, we see now that violence is not just gang conflict, urban uprising, and public shooting. It is also war, and the perpetual investment in a war economy. It is policing: the taking of Black life and the protocols and paradigms that ground a militarized police force are both forms of violence. Less obviously, it is resource development, school closings, service reduction, and punitive restrictions. Food deserts (the absence of healthy food) and toxic swamps (the pervasive presence of unhealthy food) are violent. The unregulated, polluted air of a factory, which poorer citizens then must breathe on a daily basis, is violent. Foreclosures are violence. Our nation’s highway construction was violence. Corporate and government austerity is violence. Violence is a powerful force, and the lessons of physics teach us that the status quo of violence and subjugation will go unmoved unless acted upon by a force (Newton’s First Law); that the change in momentum is proportional to the force causing it (Newton’s Second Law); and that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction (Newton’s Third Law). In other words, nonviolence rarely stops a violent act. There must be a violence against violence, which some are wanting to call nonviolence, but the framing of this issue matters. It is possible to be nonviolent and operate congruent and alongside violent contexts. In fact, this is one of the primary critiques of faith communities by the activist collectives: congregations talk against violence and stand right alongside it, peaceful yet abiding. Using too narrow a definition of violence, churches can rally against police shootings and ask nothing about the militarized, detached ethos of policing in general. What Is Needed Is Antiviolence The position of nonviolence is similar to the insignificance of a White person arguing they are nonracist or “not a racist” while benefitting from oppressive systems. There’s an element of ridiculousness for an American to claim nonviolence while goods we consume are produced by slaves, while the natural resources required for our production are extracted in ways that destabilize ecosystems and nations, and while our global political dominance is maintained by our collective investment into militarism and weaponry at a rate the world has never seen. Antiviolence is intentional action to reduce and prevent harm, provide benefit, and protect.d e from violence. It is active and not passive. Antiviolence leaves room for vocal and forceful vre se r sth accountability when violence inevitably occurs (whereas the false violent/nonviolent g ir llA dichotomy reinforces dominant power and propels violence because it provides no avenue to.sre adequately address how harm occurs). The position of nonviolence is often offered from h silb u privilege because the risk and direct consequence of nonviolence have been redistributed to P kco tS populations with less access to sustaining environments. You can be nonviolent behind the & fp iW gate while carnage ensues on the other side of the fence; antiviolence, however, can be.9 1 0 owned and practiced by all. 2 © th The church has used the principle of nonviolence as a way of avoiding engagement with g iryp o C #BlackLivesMatter activists, citing their aggression and use of force as undeveloped, Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. immature, and brash. But this use of force falls squarely within our definition of antiviolence, which is the resistance of violent people, institutions, and processes (whereas nonviolent keeps the focus on people, emphasizing the types of response by those being harmed). To be antiviolent is to demand accountability wherever violence exists: it is the ethical commitment to harm no person, mixed with the existential commitment to stop one’s own or another person’s harm. To address individual financial struggles within an antiviolent framework is to provide more than prayer and budgeting strategies; it is also to connect to the accessibility of local resources relative to exploitive imbalance and provide avenue to hold accountable entities that exert or benefit from causing financial harm. It is to do all of these things, and more yet to be imagined, with the goal of empowering people and reshaping conditions that yield unjust outcomes. To address an illness like diabetes from an antiviolent framework is more than to pray for healing and to resource to treatment and therapy; it is to connect personal illness to local access to nutrition, and to build outlets to address global food production in conjunction with our medical and pharmaceutical industries within the context of an inadequate health-care system. Here is another question that churches should ask: Do we speak “non-violence” in too narrow a fashion, and do we understand the depth of violence happening in our immediate vicinity? The answer to this question may expose a too-narrow definition of violence—one focused solely on guns while ignoring the displacement and divestment that throws disinherited peoples into competition with each other over (what we are told are) scarce resources: the violence that causes violence must also be our concern. Without this full understanding of violence, which grounds the Black Life movement, churches will seem at best ignorant and at worst participatory in systems of subjugation. A good homework assignment for any potential caregiver (after answering the question above) is to locate the organizations inside their community that are talking about violence in a more expansive way. You don’t have to become allies, but invite them to teach your congregation about violence and what it means to be antiviolent. The resulting relationship becomes the foundation for a multitude of care possibilities. Establishing trust is not about knowing everything, or presenting expertise that can teach the activists; sometimes it is.d e vre se simply being willing to learn, and being vulnerable enough to ask. r sth In this understanding of care, which includes expressing concern, easing anxiety, and g ir llA.sre reducing suffering; this work connects to the personal by showing a willingness and capacity h silb to connect to the local and global. Churches have to present as engaged and informed, and u P kco these subtle shifts in language (creating space for social cohesion, and reimagining/engaging tS & violence more directly)—represent much larger shifts in what it means to be church, and fp iW.9 what it means to be part of this ongoing movement in a meaningful and less marginal way. To 1 0 2 © provide care is to create or shape space as well as to provide training for people to th g iryp collectively take on the task of eradicating the harm they experience through structural o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. processes. Until this shift is made—from avoiding violence to using power to engage it honestly—a mutual partnership between the church and the movement will be virtually impossible. Shifting Leadership Churches have simple leadership models, linear and horizontal, where power flows from one direction to another. Simple in design if not always in execution, these structures emerge from a particular myth about the prophet and priest that is grounded in ancient tradition and sacred text. The myth goes like this: a person (come on, a man) or a group of persons, if we are to consider the tribe of Levi (the Levites) is set apart and holy before God, shrouded in a sort of divine mystery, and given the consent to decree, with almost no room for debate. Even when the Protestant Reformation chips away at that mystery and declares “the priesthood of ALL believers,” there is still a fairly concrete understanding that the body must have a head (singular)—one leader upon whose shoulders the government will stand (paraphrasing Isa 9). This person is a HERO. Despite history incontrovertibly proving the instability of such a paradigm, the individual hero-as-figurehead representing the masses is a norm of lasting consequence far beyond Christianity. Social justice movements, many of which either began in churches or use a moral-theological framework to ground their being—or both—also find themselves grounded in some hero archetype. Take Martin Luther King Jr., for example. His success in leading the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), one of many organizations active during that time, and his success in coordinating campaigns in Montgomery and Selma, part of a vast network of campaigns, has resulted in his being taught to every child as being the leader of the civil rights movement. The way his legacy has been projected onto Barack Obama made one man solely responsible for the destiny of millions in 2008 (although this type of hero-dependency had been foisted upon the United States presidency hundreds of years earlier). Following the struggle for the MLK holiday—first recognized nationally in 1986—gave the man born Michael King an almost mythic status. He was, for Black people everywhere, far larger than a sociopolitical change agent who confronted racism directly: he was what a leader is. The civil rights movement is how you do a movement. And a common question now asked of.d e today’s Black Life movement is, who’s the leader? vre se r sth Making MLK or Michael Jordan or Michael Jackson, or even Bugs Bunny or Batman, the g ir llA prototype of a leader is wrong for a few obvious reasons. First, many women have led.sre throughout history and continue to lead from the invisible trenches. Second, these leadership h silb u models fueled a masculinist hierarchy driven by selfish competitiveness (“there can only be P kco tS one of us in charge”), turning potential partners into fierce rivals. Third, these models assume & fp iW one potential source of wisdom and goodness and fail to make room for the collaborators, the.9 1 0 songwriters, the Scottie Pippens, or the Robins that make their leadership possible. If the 2 © th violence we defined earlier has the result of tearing apart the sense of and opportunity for g iryp o C developing a community ethos, then we can easily make the next leap and say that these Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.