tools to challenge some traditional meanings oppressive to individual African Americans and to African American communities. Taking part in critical Bible study, not in the sense that it criticizes the Bible, but in the sense that it carefully and deliberately engages the text, will help African Americans ascertain meaning that can free them to interpret text for contemporary situations.93 Even some seminary-trained African American pastors are perplexed about how to challenge traditional interpretations of biblical texts. I contend that an interpretive bridge is needed to connect critical biblical scholarship to ecclesial Bible study. An interpretive bridge between academic biblical scholarship and churches can be particularly liberating in congregations with parishioners who are racially or economically marginalized, or both. Some marginalized populations have little access to scholarly and intellectual resources, which can limit their ability to interpret the Bible in ways that allow them to conceptually extract meaning from more than a literal read. The Bible plays an important role in the lives of marginalized Christian groups, and I am convinced that it is precisely the inability to critically interpret Scripture, that has contributed to keeping numerous minorities on the margins of society.94 Moreover, African Americans’ interpretations of the Bible not only contribute to marginalization but also in many ways can be deemed self-detrimental. Such interpretations and literal reads of the Bible have contributed and continue to contribute to the internalization of racism, sexism, and homophobia in Black churches.95 Many minorities fail to understand how the Bible itself is often used to marginalize them. A literal understanding that the Bible is the Word of God that liberates all its readers is, in my opinion, a serious misunderstanding. Minority communities, chiefly African American communities, need resources that will assist them in understanding the Bible within its historical, literary, and current theological context. Historical and Sociological Context: The African American Church African American Christian education, which includes the study and interpretation of the Bible, was rooted in racism. Long before the emancipation of slaves in 1863 White slave owners realized that Christian education for Blacks was contrary to the dominant views of chattel slavery. A baptized person during this time would potentially or theoretically have had the cause to claim authority and freedom to live and grow within their Christian family..d e vre Many slave owners saw a threat to their dominance in this and so sought to make “Christian se r sth education a means to the end of maintaining the institution of slavery and placating the g ir llA.sre conscience of the church.”96 Grant Shockley states that slave owning Bible teachers took out, h silb rearranged, or phased out biblical texts with “freedom” implications.97 Most illiterate Blacks u P kco had little understanding of how they were being manipulated with the Bible. When the slaves tS & fp heard their owners’ interpretations of the biblical text, they heard justification of slavery. iW.9 Because slaves were not allowed to learn to read, they relied on these aural interpretations 1 0 2 © given to them through Bible reading or sermons from the slave masters. The slaves in turn th g iryp memorized portions they felt were beneficial for them and rejected others that they felt were o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. not. African Americans appropriated scriptures, unconsciously adopting a “reader response” biblical hermeneutic.98 If this had not been the case, Eph 6:5—“servants be obedient to them that are your masters...”—would have been adhered to as all other literal interpretations of the Scripture; however, Blacks like Howard Thurman’s grandmother understood Eph 6:5 as not being the “Word of God.”99 Given the tools to read the text critically as a strategy for liberation, African Americans can become more aware of their own internalized racism, sexism, and heterosexism. Biblical authority today can be reassessed in light of these early African American liberationist readings.100 The resistances to critical biblical interpretation within the African American church today tend to take on two dimensions. The first dimension demonstrates interpretations that can lead to various forms of abuse, and the second dimension acknowledges the inability to link cultural experiences with the Scripture as a source of empowerment and agency. A study conducted in 2009 by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life revealed that 55 percent of African American Christians surveyed interpreted Scripture literally.101 Such a high number of literal interpreters means that the traditional interpretations and understandings of the text continue, which can conflict with contemporary reality, and in some cases can be dangerous. While visiting a neighborhood church, I observed a young man drag his very unhappy wife up to the altar after the pastor of the church had finished preaching that wives should obey their husbands. He declared that this is plainly stated in Eph 5:22, and that this is the Word of God and should be obeyed. It was obvious from the look on the woman’s face that she had had a rough night with her husband and had no desire to be in church with him, let alone to be dragged down the aisle to the altar. I suspected abuse, yet the pastor had no regard for the woman’s distressed demeanor. It was the Word of God, and she must submit to her husband’s wishes regardless. Instances like these point to the dangers of having a limited understanding of a critical biblical analysis. Second, because most African Americans traditionally use only a literal reading of the Bible, they are not aware of the agency their community has to interpret scriptures from their own cultural experiences. They also do not understand how traditional biblical interpretations have influenced their responses to societal issues. For instance, regarding homosexuality, a broad-based coalition of gay-rights organizations and homosexual advocacy groups reported in 1994 that 1.51 percent of the total U.S. population, or 4.3 million Americans in total,.d e vre identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.102 In spite of this statistic, homophobia is still a big se r sth issue in the African American community and in the Black church. Overall, about four in ten g ir llA African Americans ( 41 percent) thought that homosexuality should be accepted by society,.sre h silb while 46 percent said that homosexuality should be discouraged. By contrast, among the u P public overall, those who said that homosexuality should be accepted outnumbered those kco tS & fp who said it should be discouraged ( 50 percent to 40 percent).103 Since Black men are iW discriminated against by society in general, few Black men want to experience the extra.9 1 0 2 discrimination of being gay. In addition, homosexuality is denounced by the majority of © th g iryp Black churches, which see it as a sin according to traditional interpretations of the biblical o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. text. A combination of these factors causes many Black men to keep their sexual orientation a secret. Black men who have sex with men identify themselves as ‘‘on the down low’’ instead of labeling themselves as gay. In the vast majority of cases, the woman in the relationship is unaware of her partner’s activities and continues to have, in many cases, dangerous, unprotected sex. This fact contributes to the statistic that African American women have the highest rates of AIDS in the United States. If the stigma of homosexuality is addressed in the church with the aid of critical biblical interpretation, lives lost senselessly because of AIDS might be spared. Even though some African American scholars such as Brown, Reems, and Braxton have challenged the universality of the historical-critical method and began to point to culturally specific reader-response interpretations, ecclesial-liturgical readers in African American communities have moved little from literal interpretations. This means that even though biblical scholarship, especially by Black scholars, is constantly improving, the majority of African American church communities do not benefit from it. This in turn thwarts the liberating efforts of the scholarly community. Thus, a bridge is needed to connect the two. Theological Interpretative Implications Exploring the Bible for any reason other than grounding one’s faith, in any traditional setting, can be a touchy endeavor, particularly within the African American church. Why would anyone want to challenge God’s word? Why would anyone need to? African American pastors and church leaders regard the Bible as a foundation for Christian theology and faith. Even though Christian leaders consider the Bible to be sacred text, not all of them give it the same regard when constructing their theologies. Some believe the Bible is fundamentally the Word of God, that God is the author and therefore the Bible has no flaws; it is inerrant—completely without error. This interpretive approach is mainly found in minority and evangelical churches, leading to more rigid, exclusive theologies. Others take a more modern approach to the biblical text, believing that it is the product of humans, and that even as a holy document it still can contain errors and contradictions. Those with this more modern approach tend to have more liberal theologies. Several mainline denominations fall into this category. Finally, there are those who regard the Bible minimally, using it only to support the theology or practices they adhere to. This.d e vre approach can be found in some New Age Christian congregations.104 Regardless of what se r sth approach is taken, Christians have to understand that all Scripture is given its meaning by g ir llA readers and communities of readers, and that no scripture has one static, fixed, or rigid.sre h interpretation. silb u P Stephen Fowl is a Christian theologian who argues for a new Christian interpretation of kco tS the Scriptures, and that such interpretations involve a complex interaction of Christian & fp iW convictions, practices, and concerns.105 He discusses the need for Christian interpreters to.9 1 0 2 give some place to the Spirit: first, by bearing witness to the work of the Spirit in the lives of © th g iryp others; and second, by recognizing that the Spirit in others causes friendship and spiritual o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. bonds. This recognition, he states, brought about the inclusion of Gentiles to the early church in Acts 10–15, and it can be used to support the contemporary argument for the inclusion of homosexuals.106 I agree with Fowl, as I do with Paul, who wrote to the Corinthians admonishing them to be ministers of a new covenant, “not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.”107 African Americans no longer need to accept interpretations that victimize them, but rather can interpret the Scriptures in a way that helps them build an inclusive community of liberating spiritual care. Fowl also argues for an ad hoc use of professional biblical scholarship in relation to Christian interpretation. While he believes that it is useful he contends that it is not necessary, because not all of it will be equally useful all the time. I understand Fowl’s point that not all biblical scholarship is useful,108 but I think that a systematic approach to biblical criticism can be useful for minorities, particularly to those who have never been introduced to a critical biblical approach. Biblical criticism coupled with the Spirit of God, plus the convictions, practices, and concerns of African Americans will guide Black readers of the Bible toward interpretations that will liberate and empower them, and that will lead them to a theology of justice and inclusion. Methods for Interpreting Scripture The historical-critical method was introduced in the early part of the nineteenth century as a way of understanding the Bible within its own context and culture. Its main aim was to bridge the gap between ancient writings and modern readers.109 The method entailed a process that focused on the historical and theological context of the scripture, in an attempt to draw meaning out of the text (exegesis). Eisegesis, its opposite, is reading meaning into the text, and came to be understood as a misreading of the text.110 The historical method eventually became understood as the scientific method of determining the one true, objective meaning of the text. The historical-critical method lay unchallenged until the latter part of the twentieth century when literary critics began to focus on the text as text rather than historical “windows to the world,”111 and ideological critics began to identify power relations in the text. Feminist and womanist scholars have challenged the gender constructions in the text, while liberationists,.d both Latina/o and Black, have challenged the effects of the political, social, and racial e vre se economy of biblical translations. The historical-critical method was shown to be highly r sth g patriarchal and middle-class in its approach, debunking the myth of the method’s scientific ir llA.sre objectivity.112 However, in spite of century-long trends in scholarly circles, the historical- h silb u critical method of interpretation has yet to reach minority ecclesial circles. P kco In addition to the historical-critical method of biblical interpretation, scholars use several tS & fp other methods for making meaning in the biblical text. They range from the traditional iW.9 1 literary criticism to form criticism to source criticism and redaction methods to more 0 2 © th contemporary feminist or womanist criticism, reader-response criticism, canonical criticism, g iryp o postmodern criticism, and so on. C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. In light of the many new interpretive tools, the historical-critical method has come of age and is no longer the only method that renders truth of meaning. Given this phenomenon, I still suggest that the historical-critical method be used as the first of two methods in ecclesial settings, not because it renders so-called true meaning to the text, but because it gives readers a clearer understanding of where to start. This method helps answer basic questions such as Who were the original authors? When did they write this material? To whom were they writing? What was the sociopolitical background that helped to produce the text? All these questions are helpful in establishing differences between the text in its context and in our own. Thus, I start with the historical-critical method as one of my primary resources to aid in theological inquiry. Second, I include literary criticism; the basics of literary criticism give insight into what type of literature is being read. Knowing the type of literature starts the meaning process. One would not look for history in a parable, or law in love poetry, for instance. Brad Braxton recommends the “reader-response” method. With reader-response criticism comes “the rise of the importance of the reader in the creation of meaning[, which] entails the relative decline of the importance of the author as the sole arbiter of what the text really means.”113 Meaning now is coming not from the author only, but from the relationship and communication that happens between the author and readers. The Bible is a book full of all types of beautiful literature, but if one thinks that it is simply the Word from God, all of which is historically true, then all sorts of problems can emerge. Some of these problems feminist and womanist Bible critics have pointed out clearly in the text.114 Considering the amount of sexism in the church, I also emphasize techniques for reading the biblical text from a feminist or womanist perspective. I suggest these primary interpretive methods for several reasons. First, when one discovers the world of the writer of the text, the cultural context and social norms of the writer, it gives one knowledge of the writer’s world, which sheds new light on the meaning of the text. The writer’s world is often a world that is very different from the reader’s. Thus, readers see the absurdity of projecting their modern assumptions onto the world of the biblical writers. Second, a basic understanding of what type of literature one is reading in the biblical text also lends the text new meaning. In addition, when students discover that some texts come from other sources in the ancient world, that in itself can liberate them from an exclusive, imperialistic understanding of the biblical text. Third, all Bible students should have the.d liberty to interpret biblical scripture from their own cultural and social contexts, in e vre se r sth conjunction with their communities.115 g ir llA In light of the social context that bears on the lives of minorities today, I believe that these.sre hermeneutical tools can work in conjunction with other educational means that can help to h silb u strengthen our society. Education is the primary source for liberating minorities and giving P kco tS power to the powerless. Education opens the door to all of the human sciences, physical & fp sciences, history, diverse cultures, and so on. If Christian education does not align itself with iW.9 1 secular education, the Church stands to continue to loose participants, mainly the youth. In 0 2 © th particular, critical Bible study as a part of Christian education cannot be underestimated as a g iryp o viable tool for the growth and life of the church. The biblical hermeneutical tools, which I C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. have proposed will equip people of faith with the agency to use Scripture as an instrument of liberation for the body, mind, and soul. Conclusion—Interpretation for a Liberating Spiritual Care Over the centuries biblical passages have been interpreted to reflect the culture and society that rendered the interpretation. In African American churches traditional biblical interpretations have directly corresponded to traditional responses that have helped to keep them within the margins. And as much as tradition has its place, traditional values and ethics have to be examined for indiscretions and discriminations. Every generation is gifted with the Scriptures and has the right to allow the Spirit of God to give fresh insights into the meaning. The biblical text should always be regarded as sacred, but its sacredness lies in the spirit of the interpretation and the power of the interpretation to produce a radical transformation of the human spirit. In this era of #BlackLivesMatter, biblical interpretation within the Black church has to be addressed in a new way. Biblical scholars have had for decades the methodological tools to understand how sacred texts can be interpreted. Early scholars deemed that the historical- critical method was the best tool for getting at the most correct meaning. Literary scholars added that meaning could be inferred by the intent of the literature. Today, many postmodern biblical scholars contend that the author’s meaning can never be completely ascertained, and that all meaning comes forth from the reader. I maintain that all these methods have interpretive value and should no longer belong solely to the academy but can become liberating tools in every Christian education program within the church, particularly within the African American church, where #BlackLivesMatter. 93. Brown, What They Don’t Tell You, 5. 94. Weems, “Reading Her Way through the Struggle,” in Stony the Road We Trod, 57–77. Weems starts her compelling argument stating that even though marginalized groups regard the Bible as a meaningful resource, it is often used to reinforce their marginalization. She concludes with the point that marginalized readers have to restore the voices of the oppressed in the kingdom of God by resisting “those elements of tradition that have sought, even in the name of revelation, to diminish their humanity.”.d 95. I am using Black Church and African American Church interchangeably. e vre se 96. Shockley et al., “Christian Education and the Black Church,” 8. r sth g ir llA 97. Ibid, 8..sre 98. Braxton, No Longer Slaves, 29. Braxton states, “Reader-response theory suggests that meaning does not reside solely h silb in the text… [It] is a product that is created from the encounter between text and reader.” u P kco 99. Thurman, Jesus and the Disinherited, 30–31. tS & fp 100. Braxton, No Longer Slaves, 29. iW.9 1 101. Sahgal and Smith, “Religious Portrait of African-Americans,” 1. In this article the analysis states that “among 0 2 © African-Americans with less than a high school education, nearly two-thirds (63%) are members of historically black th g iryp churches, as are about the same number (60%) of African-Americans who are high school graduates. Among African- o C Americans who have completed college, however, fewer (53%) are members of historically black Protestant churches.” Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 102. Gagnon et al., “National Health and Social Life Survey,” 287. 103. Ibid., 146. 104. Head, Absolute Beginner’s Guide to the Bible, 16–17. 105. Fowl, Engaging Scripture, 8. 106. Ibid, 121. 107. 2 Cor 3:6. 108. Fowl, Engaging Scripture, 179. 109. Segovia, “Bible as a Text in Cultures,” 24. 110. Ibid., 25. 111. Ibid., 25. 112. Ibid., 26–27. 113. Braxton, No Longer Slaves, 30. 114. Trible, Texts of Terror; and Weems, Battered Love. 115. Braxton, No Longer Slaves, 30..d e vre se r sth g ir llA.sre h silb u P kco tS & fp iW.9 1 0 2 © th g iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. 9 Breaking Bread and Breaking the Silence in Black Churches Let’s Talk Mental Health R J OCHELLE OHNSON Introduction Jesus left that place and went away to the district of Tyre and Sidon. Just then a Canaanite woman from the region came out and started shouting. “Have mercy, Lord, Son of David, my daughter is tormented by a demon.” But he did not answer her at all. And his disciples came and urged him, saying, “send her away, for she keeps shouting after us.” He answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” But she came and knelt before him, saying, “Lord, help me.” He answered, “It is not fair to take the children’s food and throw it to the dogs.” She said, “Yes, Lord, yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.” Then Jesus answered her, “Woman, great is your faith! Let it be done for you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed instantly. (Matt 15:21–28, NRSV) I recognize that placing this scripture in conversation with statistics on mental health and Black churches can be problematic. Especially since some clergy, without considering biological or environmental factors, equate mental health distress with demonic possession and spiritual weakness. This practice has done harm to some parishioners who believe wholeheartedly that their suffering isn’t caused or influenced by biological or environmental factors, and as a result fail to seek professional help. Untreated mental health distress has devastating consequences for the mind, body, spirit, and community. In 2017, mental health again played an outsize role in the shooting deaths by police: 236 people, or nearly one in four of those shot, were described as experiencing some form of mental distress at the time of the encounter.116 In this scripture the disciples’ and Jesus’s initial response mimic the.d e literature findings on the church experience of some mentally distressed parishioners. The vre se r sth published results of an anonymous survey with 293 participants appeared in an article titled g ir llA “Demon or Disorder: A Survey of Attitudes toward Mental Illness in the Christian Church.”.sre Analysis of the results found that while a majority of the mentally ill participants were h silb u accepted by the church, approximately 32.9 percent of mentally ill participants reported a P kco tS negative interaction. Negative interactions included abandonment, equating mental illness & fp with the work of demons, and suggesting that the mental disorder was the result of personal iW.9 1 sin. Analysis of the data by gender found that women were significantly more likely than 0 2 © th men to have their mental illness dismissed by the church or to be told not to take psychiatric g iryp o medication. The negative influences of the antipsychiatry movement of the 1960s and 1970s C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. are still found in the Christian community today.117 Some mentally distressed parishioners experience a feeling of being invisible, silenced, and shamed in the church. In our scripture Jesus isn’t positive, but eventually he uses his body in a helpful way: it functions as a catalyst for transformation and healing. A Kohutian perspective offers a theoretical framework within which we can conceptualize the healing aspects of the interaction between Jesus and the Canaanite woman. Kohut theorizes that during our childhood, if our relational experiences, with our caregivers are optimal, then they function as a selfobject need fulfillment and allow for the development of a healthy self. Kohut believed that these needs didn’t cease as we matured, but instead remained throughout our lifetime. Sheppard summarized five selfobject needs: Mirroring: the need to feel recognized, affirmed, and confirmed as a whole person; the 1. need to feel accepted and appreciated. Idealizing: the need to experience oneself as an extension or part of a respected, strong, 2. and admired person. Kinship/twinship: the need to feel that one is essentially like those important in the 3. developmental milieu. Adversarial: need to oppose a benign force who will remain present, caring, and 4. encouraging in the face of opposition. Efficacy: the need to experience oneself capable of impacting one’s environment.118 5. Later in this chapter, I will put four of these concepts in conversation with the scripture from Matthew. I am a former member of a Catholic church, located on the South Side of Chicago. It was not uncommon for the priest to end a service with an altar prayer during which he would say, “I bind up the spirit of depression.” It is my hope that if a parishioner self-identifies as being in mental health distress, the clergyperson will resist the temptation to only “bind it up in the name of Jesus!” As a child, I attended Christian Youth Baptist Church on the South Side of Chicago. At the present time, I am a member in discernment serving at Covenant United Church of Christ in South Holland, Illinois. In.d e vre between the Baptist church and my current place of worship, I have called a few se r sth other faith-based institutions my church home: an Apostolic Church of Christ g ir llA.sre church, a Church of God in Christ church, and a nondenominational church. So h silb my experience with churches spiritualizing—and mishandling—mental health u P kco diagnoses isn’t limited to the Catholic Church. If I had a dollar for every church tS & fp sermon in which I witnessed the alleged instantaneous death of anxiety or iW.9 1 0 depression at the altar, I would be rich. At the altar, a prescription was given 2 © th g without a full understanding of the person’s or persons’ experience. This is a iryp o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. risky practice because it leaves room for misinterpretation and faulty conclusions being drawn. Individuals and families left the altar with a false sense of security. In this chapter, I am arguing for Black clergy caregivers who are caring for mentally distressed parishioners to use a relational approach and collaborate with mental healthcare providers. According to the literature most churches, regardless of race, aren’t equipped to handle mentally distressed people in a manner that will be effective long term. My focus is on Black churches for a three reasons: Black people are overburdened by mental health distress due to oppression and a lack of 1. resources. Stigma related to mental illness is especially problematic among African Americans.119 2. Blacks are more likely than other groups to take their mental health concerns to a Black 3. church. Broadly speaking, traditional mainstream psychological or psychiatric literature will opt for the terms mental illness or mental disorder, in keeping with a psychomedical paradigm whereas critical social-scientific or user-centered literature tends toward the terms mental health problem or mental distress, reflecting a psychosocial paradigm.120 I too subscribe to a psychosocial perspective that considers the impact that life events and oppression, in its many forms (racism, classism, sexism, genderism, heterosexism, ageism, and so forth) can have a person’s mental health. I reject the notion that a suffering parishioner can be fully understood and cared for from a purely biological or purely spiritual perspective. This writer subscribes to a holistic care approach that considers biology, spirituality, social factors, and African American history. When the Canaanite woman sought help for her daughter’s condition, historical and social factors were in the midst of her experience. Individuals like the Canaanite woman, such as low commoners, Gentile outsiders, traveling foreigners and the like, were to be avoided, ignored, or excluded.121 When the disciples requested that she be “sent away,” they were motivated by social and political norms. A relational approach creates space for engagement that allows for connection and understanding. A dual-.d e disciplinary approach creates space for holistic care. The World Health Organization defines vre se r sth mental health as a state of well-being in which every individual realizes his or her own g ir llA potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and.sre is able to make a contribution to her or his community.122 The church and the field of h silb u P psychology share a common goal; the promotion of well-being. kco tS & fp iW Call and Response.9 1 0 2 © Central to African American religious culture, the role of first responder is driven not only th g iryp by biblical teachings but also by the long-standing history of racial discrimination and o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. injustice in this country.123 Therefore, it is understandable that a Black person or a Black family experiencing mental health distress would first express concern to the Black church. However, this poses a problem because mental health distress is beyond the scope of clergy training. On the flip side, mental healthcare providers, who are trained to deal with mental health distress, are not as well prepared to identify and address spiritual concerns. The church functioning without collaboration with mental healthcare professionals may serve as a barrier to effective mental healthcare. Mental healthcare professionals functioning without collaboration from Black clergy may serve as a barrier to effective mental healthcare for some Black people. Although advancements have occurred in the integration of spirituality and professional counseling, the actual practices have been limited in scope.124 A recent survey of care, referral, and consultation practices among clergy in New York City found that a majority was not confident in its ability to deal with a variety of problems, including alcohol and drug abuse, depression, domestic violence, severe mental illness, and suicide. Over 21 percent of the clergy surveyed were Black.... Less than half the clergy surveyed had training in Clinical Pastoral education (CPE), and those who did tended to feel more competent in dealing with all types of problems.125 However, despite how well-intentioned, in the absence of a collaboration between mental healthcare professionals and Black clergy, neither churches nor mental health agencies are equipped to provide effective long-term mental healthcare for parishioners in Black churches. In addition, it is believed that because African Americans’ mental illnesses go untreated or treated inadequately, their disease burden is greater than that of White Americans.126 A few years ago I had the pleasure of working with a seventeen-year-old young man I will call Jackson. He resided with his divorced mother in a mixed-income community. They attended a Baptist megachurch on the South Side of Chicago. The church congregation was predominately Black. Oftentimes he would report being hassled by other young men in the community for being a “nerd.” Once he was physically assaulted, and in a separate incident he was robbed of his cell phone. In response to any boundary setting, Jackson would become physically aggressive, primarily directing his anger toward his mother. He had poor school attendance and utilized his paternal grandparents’ credit cards without permission. Eventually his risky and aggressive behavior required inpatient care at a Chicagoland area psychiatric facility. Upon discharge he was referred to my office. Written on his discharge papers was a.d e diagnosis of borderline personality disorder, psychotropic medication prescriptions, and a vre se r sth referral for outpatient psychotherapy and outpatient psychiatric care. The psychotherapeutic g ir llA approach I used with Jackson included trauma-focused care, relational psychotherapy, and.sre behavior management. He was clinically depressed and anxious, and his energies were being h silb u P utilized to regulate his emotions. He reported feeling that he didn’t have the ability to kco tS graduate from high school, nor did he believe that he was employable. Jackson’s risky, & fp iW aggressive, and isolative behaviors functioned to ease his emotional pain. In other words,.9 1 0 with every swipe of the credit card, with every tantrum and act of rebellion, he was trying to 2 © th feel better, raise self-esteem, and ease the pain of depression and anxiety. The risky and g iryp o C aggressive behaviors were a dysfunctional pattern that he needed help unlearning. His Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. dysfunctional behaviors helped him regulate his emotions and work at resolving internal conflicts. The isolating behavior and suicidal thoughts provided an escape route from a life that at times felt overwhelming. During our first session, Jackson’s mother reported seeking biblical counseling from a minister at the church. The counselor offered prayer and a Scripture reading but never mentioned psychotherapy as a treatment option. Later, when she reflected on that session, this angered Jackson’s mother; she realized that the church wasn’t equipped to care for her son. I worked with Jackson for about four years: we held individual sessions as well as family sessions with his grandparents and biological father. Most of our work focused on setting appropriate boundaries, establishing effective communication between caregivers, and working through Jackson’s early childhood traumas (i.e., being separated from a parent at an early age, witnessing domestic violence, and living through his father’s near-death experience). Eventually, he had more energy, his self-esteem improved, and he gained the necessary coping mechanisms to manage negative emotions in a way that would be effective in the long term and reduce potential harm to himself and his relationships. He began to contribute to the community in a more helpful way. He secured a job in retail, and within six months he was promoted to a manager’s position. He was a spokesperson for two mental health workshops, sharing his story with community members. Lastly, he enrolled in a GED program. His relationship with his family (with his parents and grandparents) improved. Psychotherapy became an effective vehicle for change. A clergyperson who encounters an adolescent and their caregiver may not be informed about familial mental health history, community stressors, family dynamics, or emotional barriers. A church milieu isn’t conducive to the type of interview that would gather such information. However, a mental health professional is trained to conduct a psychosocial assessment that would produce such information, and works in a more conducive environment. As it pertains to mental health, at best, a clergyperson may utilize their encounter to serve as a helpful selfobject that is internalized as an affirming, accepting, and strong person. A resource that is supportive and willing to utilize its resources to colabor with the parishioner. In addition, the clergyperson is equipped to address spiritual concerns that a mental health professional isn’t trained to address. Black Churches.d e According to Douglas, no single entity can be pointed to as the Black church. It is a diverse vre se r sth groupings of churches that reflects the rich complexity of the Black community. It is defined g ir llA by its historical and social- cultural significance. Historically, it emerged as a form of.sre h resistance against White racial oppression.127 Historically the role of the Black church and silb u P Black clergy has been to provide support to the Black community for mental healthcare kco tS services. Clergy are considered the first line of contact for mental healthcare services because & fp iW of availability, accessibility, and trustworthiness.128 This may contribute to the.9 1 0 2 underutilization of the traditional mental healthcare system by Black parishioners. In © th g iryp addition, given that Black clergy are viewed as the first line of defense for mental health o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. distress, their attitudes toward seeking professional help may help to determine whether a parishioner seeks professional help or not. Researchers in one study concluded that the following concerns impacted clergy decision whether or not to refer parishioners to mental health providers or not: (1) If clergy shared the same values as the mental healthcare professional, then clergy would refer; (2) if clergy trusted the mental healthcare professional, then clergy would refer; 3) finally, if clergy knew that their relationship with the mental healthcare provider was mutually beneficial—that is, if the mental healthcare professional would make referrals to clergy—then clergy would refer.129 Stigmatization Black people are more reliant on faith in God and less reliant on seeking professional mental healthcare. The stronger their faith, the less likely they are willing to admit experiencing negative emotions, or to seek professional help. This reluctance is born out of a fear of being perceived as spiritually weak for needing secular help.130 Stigma, shame, or both keep to congregants from seeking help from a mental-health professional. Stigma is defined as a set of negative and often unfair beliefs that a society or group of people has about something.131 In a study conducted by Cooper-Patrick et al., stigma was for Black patients a significant barrier to getting treatment For African Americans, the idea of seeking professional help is culturally unacceptable among family members and peers.132 Horrid History Maude White Katz provides a catalog reference from a medical college in South Carolina that included this paragraph: “No place in the United States offers as great opportunities for the acquisition of medical knowledge, subjects being obtained from among the colored population in sufficient number for every purpose, and proper dissections carried on without offending any individuals in the community.”133 This is just one example of a horrid practice in the medical field, which treated Black bodies like lab rats. So, it is understandable that Black Americans are less likely to use mental healthcare services. Interpersonal and social trust is an important influence on the relationship and interactions between a patient and a healthcare provider. It is more so important for non-White groups.134 Having mental.d e vre healthcare referrals readily available is one step in providing holistic pastoral care. However, se r sth equally if not more important is the relationship the clergy has established with the referral g ir llA source. This alleviates some of the clergyperson’s anxieties about a values conflict with the.sre h mental healthcare professional. Such a relationship also may alleviate some of the silb u P parishioners’ anxiety about the mental healthcare professional as well. The recommendation kco tS that the parishioner see a mental healthcare professional will come across as more genuine if & fp iW the clergyperson has a relationship with the secular provider. Second, the clergyperson can.9 1 0 2 serve as a spiritual resource for the mental healthcare provider. Clergy should work with © th g providers to make mental health services accessible and affordable. Clergypersons should ask iryp o C agencies or private practice providers to offer a sliding scale to its membership. They could Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. work to create an environment hospitable to their parishioners: i.e. invite the agency staff or private practice providers to visit the church and become familiar with Black church culture. Relationship “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter is tormented by a demon” (Matt 15:22, NRSV). The Canaanite woman needed to be connected to someone she felt was stronger than herself. So she tried to connect with Jesus, a respected and admired person. Clergy are respected and admired members of the Black community. Parishioners experiencing mental distress and choosing to reach out to clergy may be hoping to connect to a stabilizing presence that they view as stronger than themselves. Clergy should know that more often than not just being fully present with a member can be healing. Clergy can create a holding environment in which they feel in sync with another human being; held, soothed with calming voice tones, and heard in a deep way. “[Jesus] answered, ‘I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.’ But she came and knelt before him, saying, ‘Lord, help me.’ He answered, ‘It is not fair to take the children’s food and throw it to the dogs.’ She said, Yes, Lord, yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table” (Matt 15:22, 24– 27, NRSV). This verbal and physical exchange between Jesus and the Canaanite woman is a pivotal moment upon which the outcome is predicated. The woman is oppositional with Jesus, yet he functions as a “benign force” that remained physically present and in communication with her. Although, his words were probably not pleasing to the woman’s ears, he communicated nonverbally that he cared by remaining physically present and continuing his verbal exchange with the woman. In other words, he remained in relationship with the woman. She was being adversarial with Jesus, yet he remained in dialogue with her. Walker-Barnes notes credible pastoral care for the StrongBlackWoman is that which does not avoid, minimize, rationalize, or otherwise dismiss her experience, but is willing to “sit with” the discomfort of the realities of racism, sexism, and classism.135Although, this chapter isn’t specifically focused on the StrongBlackWoman, the message is applicable; credible care is marked by a willingness to remain in relationship despite the uncomfortable realities. It is not uncommon for persons experiencing mental distress to have poor interpersonal relationship functioning in other areas of life. This makes the relational experience with clergy or ministry leaders even more valuable. “Then Jesus answered her, ‘Woman, great is your faith! Let it be.d e vre done for you as you wish.’ And her daughter was healed instantly.” (Matt 15:26–28, NRSV). se r sth The Canaanite woman’s engagement with Jesus was empowering: she experienced herself as g ir llA capable of shifting Jesus’s attention away from cultural norms and practices and toward her.sre h particular situation, thus meeting an Efficacy need. Mirroring occurred when Jesus silb u P recognized her personhood: she was not a dog; she was a “woman.” Not only was she kco tS human, but she had great faith. I am not suggesting that mentally distressed persons or their & fp iW caregivers need the clergyperson to sustain a healthy sense of self. But I am suggesting that.9 1 0 2 when two or more human beings come together and a reciprocating encounter occurs, the © th g opportunity is present for either person or both persons in that moment to function as a iryp o C selfobject need. A coconstructed between space is created that has the potential to be healing. Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52. It’s the relationship that heals, the relationship that heals, the relationship that heals.136 The Canaanite woman was changed by her encounter with Jesus, and Jesus was changed as well. This experience can be cobeneficial—an opportunity for both parties in an encounter to experience healing and growth. Safe Space In conclusion, Black churches have a unique opportunity to utilize their reputation as reliable resources to promote a holistic approach to mental health distress in the Black community. Such an approach promotes care for the whole self: mind, body and spirit; it promotes self- care and self-understanding. The Black church can create a safe space by breaking the silence on mental health distress, working to destigmatize mental health distress and making it acceptable to ask for professional help. Black churches can help parishioners attain long- term, effective solutions to mental health distress, not only by collaborating with mental health professionals, but also by establishing reciprocal relationships with these professionals. 116. Sullivan et al., “Nationwide, Police Shot and Killed Nearly 1000 People in 2017.” 117. Stanford, “Demon or Disorder,” 447. 118. Sheppard, Self, Culture, and Others, 117–18. 119. Catalano et al., “Disproportionate Use of Psychiatric Emergency,” 1667. 120. Coppock and Dunn, Understanding Social Work Practice, 8. 121. Gullotta, “Among Dogs and Disciples,” 337. 122. World Health Organization, Mental Health. 123. Trader-Leigh et al., Understanding the Role. 124. Frame et al., “Counseling African Americans,” 19. 125. Moran et al., “Study of Pastoral Care,” 263. 126. Wang et al., “Recent Care of Common Mental Disorders,” 289. 127. Douglas, “Black and Blues,” 113..d 128. Allen et al., “Being Examples of the Flock,” 11. e vre se 129. McMinn et al., “Psychologists Collaborating with Clergy,” 567–68. r sth g 130. Davey and Watson, “Engaging African Americans in Therapy,” 40. ir llA.sre 131. Greenstein, “I Stop Stigma By...” h silb u 132. Cooper-Patrick et al., “Identification of Patient Attitudes,” 435. P kco tS 133. White Katz, “She Who Would Be Free—Resistance,” 66. & fp iW 134. Cooper-Patrick et al., “Identification of Patient Attitudes,” 436..9 1 0 2 135. Walker-Barnes, Too Heavy a Yoke, 165. © th g iryp 136. Yalom, Love’s Executioner, 91. o C Spiritual Care in an Age Of #BlackLivesMatter: Examining the Spiritual and Prophetic Needs of African Americans in a Violent America, edited by Danielle J. Buhuro, Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2019. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/meadville/detail.action?docID=5974514. Created from meadville on 2025-08-09 01:34:52.