--- Page 1 ---
3

Extended Family Patterns,
Kinship Care,
and Informal Adoption

The extended family is so essential to an understanding of the lives of many
African Americans that it is presented here in detail. We, as family therapists,
must expand our field of vision from the focus on a nuclear family model to
the incorporation of an extended family and multisystems model if we are to
treat African American families effectively. This forces us to expand our tech-
niques to include more complex interactions, requires special sensitivity to the
strengths of this type of family organization, and calls for an awareness of the
distinct problems that it can present.

A number of scholars and researchers have documented the strength that
extended kinship relationships provide in many Aftican American families
(Billingsley, 1968, 1992; Hill, 1972, 1993, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996;
Jones, in press; Logan, 2001; McAdoo, 1981, 1996, 2002; McAdoo & McAdoo,
1985; Stack, 1974; White, in press). As clinicians and family therapists, however,
it is imperative that we understand the complex interrelationships that can ex-
ist, and that we develop some cultural and clinical guidelines as to the charac~
teristics of well-functioning extended families. This will greatly aid us in the

process of assessment and treatment planning for this population. It is my belief _

that understanding the cultural norms for well-functioning extended families
will help us to delineate problems clearly when they exist. Although the ex-
tended family has been a major source of strength for Black people, it would
be a serious error to assume that it always functions as a support within a given
family. As Hill (1999a) has pointed out, an emphasis on the strengths of the ex-
tended family should not obscure the fact that a particular extended family

52

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 53

may also have some negative characteristics. This chapter explores the positive
and negative issues related to effective assessment of extended family networks
in Aftican American families. In order to accomplish this goal, the chapter is
divided into three sections: (1) a comprehensive description of African Ameri-
can extended family networks, including discussion of reciprocity in families,
nuclear family households within an extended family culture, and the different
forms of extended family constellations; (2) an exploration of the differences
between functional and dysfunctional patterns in African American extended
families; and (3) a discussion of kinship care and informal adoption in African
American families, which focuses on the benefits of this process as well as its
problems, secrets, and clinical implications.

AFRICAN AMERICAN EXTENDED FAMILIES
AND KINSHIP NETWORKS

Many African American families function as extended families in which rela-
tives with a variety of blood ties have been absorbed into a coherent network
of mutual emotional and economic support (Billingsley, 1968, 1992; Hill, 1972,
1993, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996; Logan, 2001; McAdoo, 1981, 1996,
2002). White (in press) has pointed to “the numbers of uncles, aunties, big ma~
mas, boyfriends, older brothers, and sisters, deacons, preachers and others who
operate in and out of the Black home” (p. 3). He adds that when Black families
are viewed from this perspective, one can recognize the extent to which

a variety of adults and older children participate in the rearing of any one Black
child. Furthermore, in the process of childrearing, these several adults plus older
brothers and sisters make up a kind of extended family who interchange roles,
jobs, and family functions in such a way that the child does not learn an ex-
tremely rigid distinction of male and female roles.

White further emphasizes that use of an extended family model can help fam-
ily theorists and therapists formulate ways to employ Black family strengths,
thus lessening the negative impact of a deficit view of African American fam-
ily structure.

Reciprocity and the Extended Family Network

For many African American extended families, reciprocity—the process of help-
ing each other and exchanging and sharing support as well as goods and ser-
vices—is a central part of their lives. It has been one of the most important
Black survival mechanisms. Stack (1974), in her classic anthropological re-
search, gave some of the most in-depth descriptions of the way in which ex-
change and reciprocity networks operate in many Black communities. Her ob-



--- Page 2 ---
54 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 55

servations are still relevant today. She describes a number of different levels at
which family members interact, including “kinship, jural, affectional and eco-
nomic” factors. This reciprocity might take many different forms, from lending
money to taking out “kin insurance” by taking care of a relative’s child with
the understanding that the same help will be returned when needed. It also
takes the form of emotional support, knowing that a relative can be counted
on to “share the burden” in times of trouble, and that one will offer such emo-
tional support in return.

An important problem in the reciprocity system in some African Ameri-
can families is the imbalance that can sometimes result in the overburdening of
one or more individuals. Therapists need to be especially aware of this poten-
tial imbalance since it is not uncommon for an individual or individuals to
come to occupy an overly central and depended-upon position in the family
network, such as a member who functions as the family “switchboard”
through which all messages are conveyed. In these families the extended family
may exist in structure, but the exchange of support is imbalanced to the extent
that one member may become “burnt out.” Thus it is essential that the thera-
pist explore not only the question of whether the extended family support sys-
tem exists, but also whether it functions in a supportive, reciprocal way.

networks with friends or by joining a church in their community, Given, how-
ever, that the cultural norm for many Black families is at least some regular in-
volvement with extended family members, it is important for the therapist to
explore the hypothesis of “emotional cutoff” (Bowen, 1976; Nichols &
- Schwartz, 1998) with a family who appears to be very isolated, Emotional cut-
off can occur when a family or individual severs its relationship with extended
family members. It is very rare for this to appear as the “presenting problem”
in African American families. Sometimes the acting out or withdrawal of a
child may serve to draw a family into treatment and it is only later that the
_ therapist becomes aware of significant losses or cutoffs from the family of ori-
gin. Such isolation can occur when individuals and families move up the class,
educational, and economic status structure. Chapter 15, on African American
middle-class families, discusses this issue in detail.

Different African American Extended Family Models

African American extended families exist in many different forms, with many
different structures. These are not rigid or static and may undergo considerable
change over time. It would be reasonable to assume that any individual Black
person may have participated in a variety of family forms at different times in
his or her lifetime. Living arrangements are extremely varied and often ex-
tremely changeable in African American extended families, manifesting what
Minuchin (1974) and Nichols and Schwartz (1998) have described as “perme-
able boundaries” (Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996). For example, a relative may
live with his or her extended family during times of trouble and move out
again when he or she is “back on his feet.” Therapists must recognize this per-
meability if they are to understand the true nature of the interactions in these
families.

Many therapists have been exposed by now to the concept of an ex-
tended family among African Americans. It is significant, however, that just as
many express considerable confusion about the various types of extended fam-
ilies. Billingsley (1968, 1992), Hill (1977, 1999a), McAdoo (1981, 1996, 2002),
and White (in press) have explored different combinations of kinship relation-
ships. Billingsley’s (1968) distinctions help to clarify some of this diversity and
are still relevant today (Billingsley, 1992; Hill, 1999a). He divided African
American extended families into four major types: (1) subfamilies; (2) families

with secondary members; (3) augmented families; and (4) “nonblood” rela-
tives,

Nuclear Family Households within an Extended
Family Culture

It would be supporting a common misconception to represent most Aftican
American families as living continually with extended family members. In fact,
a large number of African American families function along nuclear lines, as
independent single-family households with either a mother, father, and chil-
dren or a single parent with children.

These individuals and families, of course, vary in their degree of contact,
reciprocity, and involvement with their extended family. This can depend on a
number of factors, including geographic proximity and degree of emotional
connectedness. These independent nuclear family households often participate
actively in the process of reciprocity described previously and are active in
their extended families (Hill, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996; McAdoo,
2002; White, in press).

For many African American families who live far apart geographically, it
is a common practice for one or more family members to serve in the role of
“family connector” who writes, phones, or otherwise communicates regularly
with different extended family members. Independent nuclear households,
even in different parts of the country, are thus kept in contact and updated
about births, deaths, marriages, divorces, other significant events, and family
gossip.

Some African American families function largely as nuclear families and
see very little of their extended kin. Some have established or re-created new

Subfamilies or Subsystems

Although their seminal works were written more than 25-30 years ago,
Billingsley’s (1968) and Hill’s (1972, 1977) classic research still offers the most
comprehensive description of the different types of African American families.


--- Page 3 ---
56 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 57
Carl Brown (age 12) was referred to our clinic for acting-out behavior in school,
_ truancy, and fighting with other children.

Mary Brown and Earl Stetson had been living together with Ms. Brown’s two
young children (ages 12 and 5) for 3 years. After a fire in their apartment, they
were forced to move in with Ms. Brown’s mother and her two adolescent children
(ages 18 and 17). This apartment had two bedrooms, a living room, a kitchen, and
a bathroom. Ms. Brown and Mr. Stetson were given a small bedroom that they
shared with her two children, The two teenagers had to sleep in the living room.

Both Ms. Brown and Mr. Stetson described the living arrangement as a night-
mare in which they had no privacy. They could not discipline their children or
raise them in terms of their own lifestyle. There was a constant bottleneck in the
kitchen and in the bathroom.

Carl and the other children were all furious with each other because of the
disruption in their lives. When the family was asked what the problems were, they
all focused immediately on their living situation.

Billingsley (1968) viewed subfamilies as consisting of at least two or more re~
lated individuals. Hill (1977) summarizes these as follows:

(a) The “incipient” extended family, which consists of a husband-wife subfamily
with no children of their own living in the household of relatives;

(b) the “simple nuclear” extended family, which consists of a husband-wife
subfamily with one or more own children living in the household of a rela-
tive’s family;

(© the “attenuated” extended family, which consists of a parent and child
subfamily living in the house of a relative. (p. 33)

Because of the economic realities facing many Black families, the involve-
ment of subfamilies is extremely common. This type of extended family often
confuses clinicians because they are constrained by their own narrow defini-
tion of a “home” or a “household.” It is very common for this type of ex-
tended family to be spread over many households that live in the same build-
ing, next door to one another, or very close by.

The first example given by Hill (1977) is a very common structure in the
initial young-adult phase of the family life cycle (Hill, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-
Franklin, 1996). A young couple (who may or may not be legally married)
may live in the home of the man’s or woman’s family of origin until they can
“be on their own” financially. This is particularly common in situations in
which a teenager or young woman becomes pregnant.

Over time, this initial situation can extend to a whole nuclear family unit
living within a larger extended family household. Often there is more than
one subfamily within the broader household. The case of the Colt family illus-
trates this pattern.

Secondary Members

Hill (1977) has identified a group of extended families who take in different
relatives or “secondary members”: (1) “minor relatives” (e.g., nieces, nephews,
cousins, grandchildren, siblings under age 18); (2) “peers of the primary par-
ents” (e.g., cousins, siblings close in age to the primary parents); (3) “elders of
the primary parents” (e.g., grandparents, great-grandparents, aunts, uncles); and
(4) “parents of the primary family” (p. 34). Hill (1999) further points out that
many of the dependent secondary members in African American families are
grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

There are endless examples of African American extended families con-
taining “secondary members” (Hill, 1977, 1999a). The vast majority of these
family members are children (Boyd-Franklin, Steiner, & Boland, 1995; Hines
& Boyd-Franklin, 1996; McAdoo, 2002; White, in press). These situations are
discussed in more detail in a later section of this chapter on kinship care and
informal adoption. Here, the focus is on adult “secondary members,” who fall
most commonly into the following three categories: (1) peers of the primary
parents, (2) elders of the primary parents, and (3) parents of the primary par-
ents. An example of this arrangement is provided by the next case.

Mr. and Mrs. Colt had married very young and had two daughters, Angie (age 35)
and Alice (age 40). Alice had become pregnant at age 17 and her son, Clarence,
had been raised as part of the Colt family. Alice and Clarence had always lived
within the extended family household.

The younger daughter, Angie, had left home at age 20 at the time of her first
marriage. When she was divorced 3 years later, she returned “home” to her
mother’ house. Three years later, she began dating Manny. They married a year
later and were given a floor in her mother’s house. At present, Angie, Manny, and
their two children (ages 5 and 2) are part of this large extended family household. Jo Ann was 18 when her mother died. She was the youngest of three children. Her
older siblings Anna (age 28) and Calvin (age 30) lived with their own families.
Anna felt that Jo Ann was too young to “live on her own,” so she asked Jo Ann to

It is extremely important to ask African American families where they are ‘ i
live with her, her live-in boyfriend, and her two children (ages 5 and 3).

living and also to ask them to describe their living arrangements. Many poor
African American families are forced by their economic circumstances to
“double up” in situations that create overcrowding and lack of privacy. There-
fore, defining the boundaries around the spouse subsystem (Minuchin, 1974)
or the subfamily becomes very difficult. The following case provides an exam-
ple.

Some adults move in with extended family when they are “between
jobs,” “between relationships,” or following a divorce. Because of the problems
of job discrimination, chronic unemployment, and cost of housing, this is a
common occurrence.


--- Page 4 ---
58 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 59
Jimmy (age 35) was a divorced man who had a history of long periods of unem-
ployment, He had worked as a dishwasher, as a hospital porter, and in a grocery
store but had been laid off whenever times were bad. During these times, Jimmy
moved in with his sister Janice and her two teenage children. The children had
long known that Uncle Jimmy was likely to show up at any time and stay with —
them for an indefinite period of time.

volvement and function. Stack (1974) referred to these family members as
“fictive kin.” These “fictive kin” might include “play mamas,” “play aunts,” or
“play uncles,” godmothers and godfathers, babysitters, or neighbors (Billingsley,
1968, 1992; Hill, 1999a; Logan, 2001; McAdoo, 2002; White, in press).

I remember that as a child in my own family, I was not allowed to call
adults by their first names without using the title “aunt” or “uncle.” My par-
ents’ close friends were treated as part of the family. It was not until I was about
6 or 7 that I began to make clear distinctions between these “aunts” and “un-
cles” and my blood relatives. Godparents are often very important in African
American families. My own godmother had been my mother’s best friend
since childhood, and she was extremely close to our family and played a very
special role in my growing-up years. She provided the little extras, such as gifts
that my parents could not afford.

In addition, the large proportion of nonrelated individuals living with Af-
rican American families that was mentioned under the heading “augmented
families” —roomers, boarders, lodgers, or other long-term guests—could also
be included in this category, with the distinction that while some of these rela-
tionships are transient, individuals may live with a family for many years and
eventually be accepted as part of the family. My paternal grandmother, whose
family came originally from North and South Carolina, moved to Harlem and
over the years frequently took in boarders. Many of these were young women
from her hometown who were new to the “big city”” These women became
part of her “extended family” and would often come back to visit her with
their own children.

Neighbors, close friends, babysitters, and former babysitters are also im-
portant extended family members in many African American families. These
individuals often become “play mamas” or “play aunts” to children (White, in
press).

Black families are far more likely than some White families to take in el-
derly family members; nursing home care is usually considered only as a last _
resort. This is particularly true for elderly parents and grandparents, partly be-
cause of the long parenting role African American grandparents play in family
systems (Billingsley, 1992; Boyd-Franklin et al., 1995; Hill, 1999a; Hines &
Boyd-Franklin, 1996; McAdoo, 2002; White, in press). Leisurely retirement is
rare; the African American elderly must be really physically incapacitated to
warrant hospital rather than home care. What often happens is illustrated by
the following case example.

Ellie (age 75) was living in Harlem on the top floor of the home of a friend. She _
had lived on her block for many years. Her daughter and her family had moved to
the South and repeatedly begged her to join them. Ellie insisted on staying in her
own home with her friends and in the neighborhood where she had lived for 50
years.

During a visit to her daughter, Ellic suffered a stroke. Her daughter took in
Ellie and she became a part of their household.

Augmented Families

A smaller but significant number of Aftican American children are being
raised in households in which they are not even related to the heads of these
households (Billingsley, 1992; Hill, 1977, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996;
White, in press). It is also very interesting to note that a large proportion of
nonrelated individuals living with African American families are adults, in-
cluding roomers, boarders, lodgers, or other long-term guests. Hill (1999a) has
discussed the fact that some African Americans live with families with whom _
they have no biological relationship. This is a very important piece of informa:
tion for a therapist who is attempting to build and/or contact a network for an
adult African American patient who may have been discharged from a psychi-
atric hospital or who may be homeless. This “taking in” of adults and children _
has been a way that Black families have augmented their incomes and shared
limited living space.

he Role of Family Reunions in Many African American
Extended Families

Family reunions have long served a function of bringing together extended
kin in African American families who may not see each other regularly
(Boyd-Franklin et al., 2001). There has been a resurgence of interest in this
time-honored family ritual since the publication of Alex Haley's (1977) book
Roots. Some families have constructed a “family tree” that includes special pic-
tures and memories. Some have interviewed older “family historians” who
now the background and generational connections of the family.

As in many other cultures, family reunions can take many forms and serve
_ many different functions. Weddings and funerals provide impromptu reunions
in which connections are renewed and maintained. Once a year or every few
years some families gather in a central, convenient location or return to their
hometowns in the South. Often for children raised in northern or western cit-
tes, these returns to the South offer a rare glimpse of the growing-up experi-

Nonblood Relatives

One distinction between African American and some other cultures that share
the extended family pattern is the presence and importance of individuals who _
are not related by blood ties but who are part of the “family” in terms of in-


--- Page 5 ---
60 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT

ences of their parents and their grandparents. Although family reunions vary
considerably according to family style and traditions, there are some common
experiences. One is the central and unifying role of food. Everyone partici-
pates in the cooking, and platters of turkey, ham, fried chicken, candied yams,
potato salad, collard greens and ham hocks, black-eyed peas and rice, and so on
abound. Some families with strong religious backgrounds will focus a part of
their reunion around reconnecting with their home church or “spiritual
roots.” Attempts are made to bring everybody home, and often money is
pooled to help pay the travel expenses of those who could not otherwise at-
tend. Many African American families with strong Afrocentric beliefs (ee
Chapter 8) pour a “libation” (usually water or another drink) to the ancestors,
an African ritual that honors the ancestors and the older generations in the
family who are now deceased.

In some African American families, these reunions do not begin until the
death of a very central family member who may have served as the family’s
“switchboard” or “connector.” Often families will then perceive a vacuum for
which the ritual of the reunion begins to compensate.

In any case, these reunions are special joyous occasions that provide a very
welcome emotional and spiritual refueling for all generations. They bring to-
gether the young, middle, and older generations and give all a sense of their
roots and family continuity.

It is important for therapists to be aware of this ritual in African Ameri.
can families. In some families where geographic distance has created isolation,
the ritual of a reunion can sometimes be prescribed or recommended as a
therapeutic intervention to help to rebuild or strengthen family ties, particu-
larly after a major loss.

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 61

tended family that we could not recognize problems when they appear. Once
we have a model of what is functional, we have the beginning of a strategy for
therapeutic change and restructuring.

Minuchin (1974) and Nichols and Schwartz (1998) have used the terms
enmeshed and disengaged to describe a continuum of family functioning, with
enmeshed being the overinvolved end of the continuum and disengaged the
extreme of being cut off. Extended families also present along this continuum.
In some African American families, the extended network is so enmeshed that
extended family members are constantly intruding in the core family’s func-

tioning, role relationships, and boundaries (Minuchin, 1974; Hines & Boyd-

Franklin, 1996), or at the least rules of participation become blurred. In other

families who present with dysfunctional patterns at our clinic, extended family
members are structurally present but do not get involved or interact in a sup-
portive way. These families are more disengaged and it often takes a great deal

of acting out by the identified patient to bring them in for treatment. Still
other dysfunctional families are cut off entirely from extended family contacts,
in a state of isolation that often contributes significantly to their presenting
problems.

The Functional Extended Family: Clear Boundaries

The extended family model found among the African American population

was perceived by some social scientists as somehow aberrant and dysfunctional

(Moynihan, 1965; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996). The strengths and positive
aspects of such familial systems were lost in the shadow of the “normal” nu-

clear family model. However, there is growing evidence that extended families
are indeed functional family models (Billingsley, 1968, 1992; Hill, 1972, 1999a;
McAdoo, 1981, 1996, 2002; McAdoo & McAdoo, 1985; White, in press).
The following case example highlights the basic components that distin-
guish a functional extended family system from one that is having difficulties.

THE QUESTION OF FUNCTIONAL VERSUS
DYSFUNCTIONAL EXTENDED FAMILIES

As has been established above, the presentations of African American extended
families may vary considerably. The extended family system can clearly be a
source of strength and support in many African American families (Billingsley,
1968, 1992; Hill, 1972, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996; Jones, in press;
Logan, 2001; McAdoo, 1981, 1996, 2002; White, in press). As family therapists,
however, we must be able to distinguish between functional and dysfunctional
African American extended families.

Just as there is considerable diversity among African American nuclear —
families, there are many different types of extended family structures. It is im-
portant for therapists to understand how these structures and roles interplay
when they are functional and how they become problematic and dysfunctional
when they are confused or unclear. It would be doing a great disservice to the _
African American families we treat if we so glorified the strengths of the ex-

Joyce, a 25-year-old African American female, grew up within an extended family
system that consisted of her maternal grandparents, a maternal aunt and uncle who
were married, two nephews, and a younger uncle who was unmarried. All of the
married family members had their own living space within the house. Joyce’s par-
ents moved into a very large room on the second floor of the home that had an
adjoining bathroom. They shared the kitchen with the grandparents, who lived on
_ the first and second floors. Off the kitchen on the first floor was a small room that
_ was occupied by “Aunt” Joan, a close friend of the grandmother, who boarded

with the family. She had a job as a live-in domestic with a White family during the
week and stayed with Joyce’s family on the weekends.

The family was able to have “private” places for each subfamily unit.
Children had free rein of the house and interacted with and were cared for by all
the adults, but it was also very clear as to who each child’s parents were. Although
_ there were kitchens in the top two apartments, the grandparents’ kitchen was the


--- Page 6 ---
62 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT

hub of the house. The family table could seat 16 and often did, especially on Sun-
days and holidays. Joyce often played on the floor of the kitchen with her siblings
and cousins while the adult women were cooking.

When Joyce was 2, her mother returned to work and her grandmother took
care of her and the other children in the household. There was an interchange of
babysitting, children’s clothes, maternity clothing, cribs, baby carriages, and so on
between the different families.

This combination of separate, private subfamilies in one extended family
household and easy sharing and interchange clearly outlines the elements that
make an extended family system function well. First, the boundaries were flex-
ible but also very clear (Minuchin, 1974; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996). Sec-

ond, there was no confusion with regard to who were the parents or executive
figures, and thus parental authority was not undermined. The meeting of emo- _

tional needs and the availability of a support system for both children and par-
ents are also components important for the functioning of this model. Another
important pattern in many African American families is that of informal adop-
tion.

INFORMAL ADOPTION AND KINSHIP CARE
AMONG AFRICAN AMERICAN FAMILIES

The terms “informal adoption” (Hill, 1977, 1999a) and “kinship care” (Hi

1999a; Report to Congress on Kinship Foster Care, 2000) refer to an informal _

social service network that has been an integral part of the African American
community since the days of slavery (see Chapter 12). It began as, and still is, a
process whereby adult relatives or friends of the family “took in” children and
cared for them when their parents were unable to provide for their needs,
whether for medical, emotional, financial, housing, or other reasons. As Hill

(1977) has pointed out, “during slavery, for example, thousands of children of

slave parents, who had been sold as chattel, were often reared by elderly rela~
tives who served as a major source of stability and fortitude for many Black
families” (p. 1). This informal adoption network still serves many vital func-
tions for African American families, such as “income maintenance and day

care, services to out-of-wedlock children and unwed mothers, foster care and _

adoption” (Hill, 1977, p. 3). Today this process has been denoted “kinship care”
by the child welfare system. It has become even more common as many Afri-
can American families struggle with losses due to parental drug and alcohol
abuse, AIDS, and incarceration (Boyd-Franklin et al., 1995; Hill, 1999a; Hines
& Boyd-Franklin, 1996; Logan, 2001).

Child welfare and social service policies have changed a great deal in re-
cent years. Unfortunately, although many states’ child welfare agencies explore

extended family members as possibilities for placement, they often do not —

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 63

know enough about African American cultural patterns to go far enough in
searching for blood and nonblood supports. African American children are still
isproportionately represented in foster care; extended family members who
take in children are often given little or no financial support as compared with
nonfamilial foster parents; and many states are still struggling to effectively im-
plement “kinship care” policies (Hill, 1999a; Report to Congress on Kinship
Foster Care, 2002; Wilson & Chipungu, 1996). (See Chapter 12.)

The original adoption agencies were not designed to meet the needs of
Black children. During segregation, Black children could not be placed
through adoption agencies (Billingsley & Giovannoni, 1970). Therefore, the
kinship care and informal adoption process provided an unofficial social ser-
vice network for African American families and children, one that was totally
unrelated to the official child welfare system (Hill, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-
Franklin, 1996).

There are many different reasons why an “informal” adoption might oc-
~ cur in an African American family. Children born out of wedlock are often in-
formally adopted by an older female relative. This is particularly true in situa-
tions such as teenage pregnancy where a mother is too young to care for her
child alone. Her female relatives will assume some of the responsibility for rais-
ing the child. In some circumstances, where the mother is extremely young,
Stack (1974) points out that she “may give the child to someone who wants
the child, for example, to the child’s father, a childless couple or to close
friends” (pp. 65-66).

The literature provides a number of useful examples. Hill (1977, 1999a)
and Hines and Boyd-Franklin (1996) have all emphasized the importance of
parental divorce or separation as a factor leading to informal adoption and kin-
ship care among African Americans. Stack (1974) gives some examples of such
_ situations, all of which illustrate the notable flexibility of the Black extended
family to cope with a variety of family structures. This kind of structural flexi-
bility is in response to the changes in familial arrangements due to the breakup
of marriage or “consensual union” (Stack, 1974). Children are frequently di-
vided among various immediate and/or extended family members until the
custodial parent (usually the mother) is able to take actual custody of them
again.

The following case describes a slightly different situation.

Soon after Flats resident Henrietta Davis returned to the Flats to take care of her
own children, she told me, “My old man wanted me to leave town with him and
get married. But he didn’t want to take my three children. I stayed with him for
about two years and my children stayed in town with my mother, Then she told
me to come back and get them. I came back and stayed.” (Stack, 1974, p. 65)

Hill (1977, 1999a) and Billingsley (1968, 1992) indicate that the death, illness,
or hospitalization of one or more of the child’s parents is another factor often


--- Page 7 ---
64 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 65
from a cousin in Georgia telling them that a younger cousin was pregnant. Both of
her parents worked and were unable to care for the child and they were concerned
that having a baby so young would drastically alter their daughter's life. Bessie and
Howard offered to adopt the child right after birth. They traveled to Georgia,
picked up the child, and raised her as their own.

leading to informal adoption. Instead of orphaned children becoming state
wards, a relative or close friend of the family will “adopt” the children, as in
the following case.

Mattie Cornwell had inherited from her mother and grandmother the job of be-
ing the switchboard and caretaker of her extended family. When she was in her 70s
her two young great-nieces (ages 4 and 6) were orphaned. As their great-aunt and
the oldest female in the family, she took the children in and raised them with her
husband.

Short-term kinship care or informal adoption can also become an exten-
sion of already existing daycare services provided by African American ex-
tended family members in order to permit a parent to go to work, school, or a
training program (Hill, 1977, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996). A similar
common scenario is the result of the strong educational orientation of most
Black families (Hill, 1972, 1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996; McAdoo,
1981, 1996, 2002; McAdoo & McAdoo, 1985). Tremendous sacrifices are often
made to permit a child to go to or live closer to a good school. In some cir-
cumstances, a child will live with relatives closer to the desired school during
the week and return home on the weekends.

Short-Term Adoptions or Kinship Care Arrangements

The circumstances discussed above are more likely to lead to long-term infor-
mal adoption arrangements. There are, however, a number of short-term kin-
ship care arrangements that often arise out of economic necessities, crisis situa~
tions, or childcare needs. In situations in which the parent is involved in a new
relationship or marriage, the children are sometimes left with grandparents or
other relatives until their mother can establish her new home (Hines & Boyd-
Franklin, 1996; McAdoo, 2002). Boyd-Franklin et al, (1995) give many exam-
ples of short-term kinship care arrangements that occur when a parent with
AIDS is hospitalized. These may eventually become permanent informal
adoptions with the death of the parent(s). Therapists should also be aware that
mothers are often forced to give up their children to the child welfare system
when they seek drug or alcohol treatment. Extended family members will of
ten take in the children in order to avoid their placement in foster care if they
are contacted in time.

A mother may request that her relatives keep one of her children. An of
fer to keep the child of a relative has a variety of implications for both child
givers and child receivers. It may be that the mother is enduring hard times
and desperately wants her close kin to temporarily assume responsibility for
her children. Extended family members rarely refuse such requests to keep one
another’s children; likewise they recognize the right of kin to request that chil-
dren be raised away from their own parents (Billingsley, 1968, 1992; Hill, 1972,
1999a; Hines & Boyd-Franklin, 1996; Logan, 2001; Stack, 1974). Individuals
allow extended family members to create alliances and obligations toward one
another, obligations that may be called upon in the future. 2

Hill (1977) points out that “many children are often taken in by relatives .
simply because they wanted a child to raise” (p. 49). Sometimes this is
prompted by a fear of being alone in old age. Other individuals and families
are unable to have children of their own and may want to adopt a child. Often
a teenage pregnancy or the addition of another child to a financially overbur-
dened family may prompt an informal adoption.

Problems Presented by Kinship Care
and Informal Adoptions

There are a number of levels on which informal adoptions can present prob-
Jems in some African American families. The last part of this chapter discusses
the secrets that can arise in Black families surrounding issues often related to
informal adoptions. These secrets can be very harmful to family relationships
and can persist for many generations.

Another level of conflict has to do with the perceptions by different fam-
ily members of the duration of the kinship care or informal adoption. For ex-
ample, as stated above, children are sometimes placed with a family member af-
ter a death, a hospitalization, a separation, or a divorce. Often the family
member who takes in the child does so with the belief that the adoption will
be permanent, or the process of adoption is left ambiguous. If, at a later point,
_ the natural parent reclaims the child, this can present heart-wrenching prob-
Jems. The following case example illustrates this common dilemma.

Karima (age 12) was referred for treatment by her guidance counselor. She had
been a good student until this school year when her grades began to deteriorate
a rapidly and she seemed very preoccupied. Mrs. Bond, her grandmother, brought
_ her for therapy at the school’s request.

The following history emerged. Karima’s mother had died when she was 3
years old. Her father, Mark Bond, who worked as a teacher and had an active social
ife, felt that she would be cared for best by his mother, Mrs. Bond. In the last year
Mark Bond had remarried, his new wife was pregnant, and at her urging he was
beginning to try to “bring his family together” by taking Karima to live with him.
Mrs. Bond began to panic. She lived alone, loved her granddaughter, and was very
threatened by her loss. Karima felt caught. Her loyalty was torn. She became sad
and depressed and reported that she loved both her father and her grandmother.

Bessie (age 40) and her husband Howard (age 42) had been married for 12 years.
‘They had been trying to have a child for many years and had gone through exten-
sive infertility testing. They were considering adoption when they received a call


--- Page 8 ---
66 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT.

The therapist asked for a session with Karima, her grandmother, and her f-
ther. Both Mark Bond and Mrs. Bond seemed very angry with each other and
tense. They each engaged in a process of trying to get the therapist on “their side”

Karima, sitting in the middle, burst into tears. The therapist asked her to come out _

of the middle and sit next to her. She asked the father and grandmother to talk
with each other about the issue of where Karima should live and what was best for
Karima. They found it very difficult to focus on this issue and continued to insult
each other. Mrs. Bond accused her son of “dumping his daughter on her” when he
needed to and now he was “tearing her heart out” by taking her away. Mr. Bond
accused his mother of stealing his daughter's love and turning her against him.

The therapist persisted and pointed out that this battle was “tearing Karima
apart.” She asked if they could put their own issues aside long enough to decide
what might be best for her. A number of sessions were necessary before they could
successfully negotiate an arrangement in which Karima would continue to live
with her grandmother during the week and go to her same school. She would visit
her father on the weekends.

This case has much in common with custody battles between divorcing
parents, in which the angry issues between the couple are acted out over the
issue of custody of the child. In “informal” adoption situations it is more com-
plex because the biological or natural parent often has legal guardianship in the
eyes of the law. It is a very recent notion in the eyes of the court to establish
the question of “psychological bonding” in these complex situations and to al-
low extended family members to become legal guardians.

Often family therapists can find themselves in the middle of complex cus-
tody battles surrounding informal adoption in African American families. This
is often complicated by child welfare agencies attempting to clarify or formal-
ize this process. In the following case example, the therapist was asked by the
state child welfare agency to make a recommendation regarding custody. He
found himself faced with an impossible, Solomon-like problem.

The Elison family was referred by their state child welfare agency for evaluation.
Rashan, age 5, had been raised since he was a 1-year-old by his grandmother,
Fanny Elison (age 45). She had taken in her grandchild at that point because her
daughter Clessy Elison (age 25) had been neglecting him. Clessy had been a her-
oin addict and had often neglected the care of her child as her craving for drugs
increased. She had entered a drug treatment program and claimed to be “drug-
free.” Clessy had been involved with Rashan inconsistently for many years. In the
last 6 months, however, she had been taking him each weekend. Fanny Elison re-
ported that her daughter frequently returned Rashan to her in a dirty and dishev-
eled state after these weekend visits. She also claimed that Clessy’s live-in boyfriend
was a drug dealer who had gotten Clessy “hooked on cocaine.” Clessy Elison de-
nied this and accused her mother of trying to take her son from her.

The therapist, in the course of Rashan’s evaluation, met with many different
subsystems in the family. He interviewed Rashan, Clessy Elison and Rashan, and

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 67

Fanny Elison and Rashan and determined that the child was fond of both “par-
ents” and got along well with both. 7

A number of sessions were scheduled with Fanny and Clessy Elison to discuss
the issue further. Each managed to cancel repeatedly. Finally, with the intervention
of the child welfare agency, a session was scheduled at which both appeared.

The therapist and his supervisor met with both family members. Both Fanny
and Clessy Elison were obviously angry but very “cold” toward each other. They
each chose seats as far from each other as they could in a small room.

Initially the grandmother accused her daughter of being on cocaine and ne-
glecting her son. They had a number of angry arguments about her lifestyle. The
therapist pushed them to talk together about Rashan and observed that in his sep-
arate sessions it was clear that he loved both of them very much. Fanny Elison told
her daughter in a very emotional way that she did not want to “keep her from her
son,” but that she was very worried about his safety and care. Clessy was able to an-
swer that she never felt that her mother would let her “make up” for past mistakes.

They agreed to work together to try to establish the best living arrangement
for Rashan. The grandmother offered to try to help Clessy regain custody by
working with her on parenting skills.

In an ideal world, the treatment might have ended on that note. However, ap-
proximately 2 weeks later, Fanny Elison appeared very angry when she arrived for
the session. She raged at Clessy and told her that Rashan had reported to her that
he had seen his mother take drugs in her home. Clessy angrily denied it. Fanny de-
manded that her daughter leave her “drug-dealing boyfriend” immediately. Clessy
refused,

The therapist, who was also becoming very concerned about the presence of
drugs in Clessy’ life, proposed a compromise. He asked Clessy ifshe was willing to
go into a drug counseling program. She agreed. Fanny Elison agreed that if her
daughter gave up drugs she would work with her to share parenting responsibili-
ties. Clessy went for one meeting with her counselor but dropped out of the pro-
gram when she learned that she would have to be tested regularly for the presence
of drugs in her system.

Clessy then dropped out of therapy. Fanny Elison continued to come for
family sessions with her grandson for a number of weeks and was helped to work
out a series of visitation agreements with her daughter and grandson, in the grand-
mother’s home, that did not put his well-being in jeopardy.

This case was a very problematic one for the therapist on a number of
levels. First, it forced him to face his own value issues regarding the “best inter-
est of the child,” particularly regarding the question of drugs. Second, his ideal
resolution—that is, a gradual return of custody to the mother with the grand-
mother helping her daughter to assume appropriate parenting responsibili-
ties—did not occur. Third, the therapist felt pressured by the child welfare
agency, the court, the grandmother, and the mother to make a recommenda-
tion. He was thus torn between his goal of keeping the child in touch with
both parental figures as sources of love and caring and the desire not to place
him in a situation that was detrimental to him.


--- Page 9 ---
68 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT

With his supervisor's help, the therapist was able to extricate himself from
these complex demands and place the responsibility for the decision on the
family. Attempts to negotiate a solution failed and the mother made her own
choice to withdraw. Ultimately the court made the decision to award custody
to the grandmother but to allow the mother to continue to visit her son regu-
larly.

The therapist in such situations must work to avoid the temptation that
results ftom the varying pulls of the family system and the child welfare or le~
gal system to “play God.” Ultimately the responsibility must be placed on the
family members to set clear limits for each other and to renegotiate complex
custody arrangements that may have begun as informal adoptions.

Secrets about Informal Adoption and Parentage:
Clinical Implications

As a result of the informal adoption process, a member of the extended family
may have raised a child whose parents were unable to do so. In some cases, this
is known by all family members, including the child, and the child often sees
his or her natural parents while growing up. In such families, although the
child may have been told who his or her real parent is, there may be another
secret kept from the child—for example, the real reason why he or she was
given up or “taken in.” Sometimes there may also be secrets about the parent’s
present lifestyle. The following case offers an example of this.

Mrs. Gifford, a 65-year-old maternal grandmother, sought treatment for her 11-
year-old grandson, Kasim. In the last year, Kasim had become increasingly de-
pressed, sad, and withdrawn. Finally, his school had suggested that Mrs. Gifford
seek treatment for him. Kasim had lived with his grandmother since he was 1 year
old. Prior to that time, he had lived with his mother. Mrs. Gifford had become
concerned when she had visited her daughter and found that she was neglecting
Kasim. Since his father had never been a part of his life and Mrs. Gifford was his
closest relative, she took Kasim in and raised him herself. His mother, Ayana, had
been in and out of his life over the years and lived in the same city but on the
“other side of town.”

In the last year, Mrs. Gifford reported that Kasim had begun to ask why he
was not living with his mother and why she had left him. He wondered if he was
to blame or if there had been something wrong with him. After careful inquiries
by the therapist, he was able to share with his grandmother that other kids often
teased him about his mother. Mrs. Gifford became visibly anxious when this issue
was raised. The therapist finally arranged to see her alone and discovered that there
was a “family secret” that she was afraid to share with Kasim: his mother had been
a drug addict since her teenage years and had also engaged in prostitution to sup-
port her habit. Mrs. Gifford had not wanted Kasim to think badly of his mother
and so she had never told him about her life. The therapist helped Mrs. Gifford to
see that Kasim was at an age when a child naturally begins to inquire about his
roots. She also discussed with the grandmother the fact that the “grapevine” in

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 69

their part of the city was very strong, and Kasim probably had learned a great deal
about his mother from the other children.

She agreed to have a session with Kasim and the therapist to discuss this issue
further. In the family session, the therapist encouraged Mrs. Gifford to find out
what Kasim had heard from the other children and what they teased him about.
She was shocked to discover that other children had called his mother a “hooker”
and a “drug addict” and that Kasim had kept this inside for some time. Both family
members were carrying the burden of this secret. She was then able to ask Kasim if.
he had questions for her. He immediately asked why his mother had left him. Mrs.
Gifford explained the circumstances and was able to help Kasim to understand that
he was not with his mother because of her lifestyle and not because of any flaw in
him.

In a subsequent session, the therapist asked that Kasim’s mother attend to-
gether with Kasim and his grandmother. In this session, the therapist learned that
in the last year Kasim’s mother had begun to feel guilty about leaving him for so
long and had started to see him more often. She had become anxious when Kasim
had asked why he couldn't live with her and had been making vague promises to
him that he could join her at some point in the future.

The therapist clarified the situation by demonstrating that this “mixed mes-
sage” was harmful to Kasim. She encouraged Mrs. Gifford and Ayana to discuss the
realities of her life situation and work out a regular visitation schedule for Kasim.
Ayana shared her guilt with her mother openly for the first time and acknowl-
edged that Kasim could not live with her. They agreed that he would continue to
live with his grandmother but that Ayana would visit him regularly every Saturday.
Ayana was then asked to discuss this openly with Kasim, who had been observing
this discussion. Tearfully she told him that she loved him but that she was confus-
ing him by telling him that he would live with her. She discussed with him the de-
cision that he would live with his grandmother but that she would visit him every
week.

Kasim cried also but appeared visibly relieved. In subsequent months, his de-
pression lifted and he began to reengage with his friends.

This type of secret, which is in fact “known” by all the parties (and by the
community), can be particularly toxic because of the energy that is involved in
“protecting” the family members from this knowledge. The “grapevine,” or
informal communication network, in African American communities is very
strong. The following case is another example of a complicated family secret
concerning an “informal adoption.”

George Kent was a 7-year-old African American boy who had been informally
adopted by his aunt when he was 6 months old. His mother had “dropped him on
her doorstep” one day and never returned. Olivia Kent, his aunt, had raised him
along with her own children, Carol (age 20), Ivy (age 15), and Althea (age 12), and
Carol’s son, Billy (age 5). There had never been any formal discussion in the family
as to George’s real relationship to the other family members. George had begun to
act out and fight at school and at home shortly after the family had been visited by
a representative of the local child welfare department. George’s mother, an alco-


--- Page 10 ---
70 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT

holic, had died in a local hospital. Prior to her death she had told her social worker
about Olivia Kent and George. The child welfare worker informed Ms. Kent that
George was now under the guardianship of her agency and a decision must be
made as to whether he would remain with Ms. Kent.

This caused a major disruption in the family. Ms. Kent petitioned formally to
adopt George but his acting-out behavior had raised questions as to the suitability
of his placement in her home.

At the point at which Ms. Kent arrived with George for her first session at
our clinic, it was clear that both of them were very frightened and angry about
these developments. The therapist helped Ms. Kent to talk about the circumstances
that had led up to this dilemma and helped her to discuss this openly with George.
George then told her that he had always wondered why he looked different from
her other children (he was darker skinned) and that Billy had often teased him
about this. He shared that he was very frightened of having to leave.

Mrs. Kent arranged a meeting of all the members of her household with the
therapist to discuss the situation. She told them the “secrets” in George’s history
and asked their support for keeping him. All of the family members were surprised
to hear that there was any question of his remaining in their family. A meeting was
arranged by the therapist with the child welfare worker and the family to clarify
their desire to formally adopt George. He beamed throughout this session. The
therapist subsequently wrote a number of letters for the family documenting the
“bonding” that had occurred between George and his “family.”

Ms. Kent was then able to discuss openly with George the fact that she could
not tolerate his acting out at home or in school. He had been “spoiled” by the
family and allowed to “get away with” a great deal. She set clear rules for him at
home and enlisted the aid of his older “sisters” to enforce these rules. His behavior
at home and in school dramatically improved.

Secrets Regarding Fatherhood

There are many issues concerning fatherhood that may become secrets in
some African American families. For example, in the following case example, a
child was raised by a stepfather and was never told the “secret” of his true pa-
ternity.

The Brown family was referred for treatment because their son Michael (age 13)
had been acting out, was aggressive with peers in school, often talked back to his
mother and father, and broke his curfew. The Brown family consisted of Mr.
Brown (age 40), Mrs. Brown (age 30), Michael, and two younger siblings, Milton
(age 9) and Karen (age 5). Mr. and Mrs. Brown reported that Michael had always
respected them until the last year. Since then he had been “running wild,” “talking
back” to them, fighting at school, and so on. They felt helpless to control him. In
the family sessions, Mrs. Brown was the family spokesman and the person who sat
closest to Michael. Mr. Brown seemed to alternate between being peripheral and
becoming involved in an angry, intrusive way with Michael. The parents clearly
disagreed with each other about discipline and limits. The mother was overindul-
gent of Michael and overinvolved with him. Therefore, the therapist decided to

Extended Family Patterns, Kinship Care, and Informal Adoption 71

put the father in charge of Michael. The family resisted this process for a number
of weeks. Finally, the therapist confronted the parents about this resistance. They
became uncomfortable and Mrs. Brown actually looked alarmed. The therapist,
sensing that this was an issue between the parents, drew a boundary and asked the
children to leave the room. Tearfully, Mrs. Brown explained that she had become
pregnant with Michael as an unwed teenager at the age of 17. Her family had been
embarrassed and angry at her because they had wanted her to go to college. They
had hidden the “secret” of Michael's birth and had never discussed it, Shortly after
his birth, Mrs. Brown met and married her current husband, who had raised Mi-
chael as his own. The other two children were his.

Mr. Brown explained that Michael had always been an issue between them.
She had protected and spoiled him and had never really allowed Mr. Brown to be a
“real father” to him. Both Mr. and Mrs. Brown agreed that Michael sensed that he
was different from the other children. He did not look like anyone else in the fam-
ily and had once angrily asked if he was adopted.

‘With the therapist’s help, Mr. and Mrs. Brown were able to discuss how this
secret had affected the way in which they had raised Michael and their inability to
work together and parent him together. They finally decided to raise the issue
with their son and to be clear with him that emotionally they were both his par-
ents. The children were called back into the room and Mr. and Mrs. Brown dis-
cussed with Michael this “secret.” Mr. Brown was able to share with him the fact
that he had accepted him long ago as his son. Michael and the other children
looked at each other often during this report. When the therapist inquired as to
what was going on between them, Michael reported that a cousin, who had stayed
with the family the previous summer, had implied that he was an “outsider” but
had never told him the details.

In future sessions, the therapist was able to restructure the family by asking
the mother to encourage Michael and Mr. Brown to spend time alone together in
order to develop the relationship between them. Both parents were able to talk
openly about setting clear limits for Michael without this toxic secret between
them.

Another type of fatherhood secret may have to do with other children,
another family, or another woman in a father’s life. Like the secrets discussed
above, these issues may be known on some level, but either denied or never
discussed by family members. In many cases, these issues surface only when
there is a family crisis or a major loss, such as a death of the father. The follow-
ing case illustrates this dilemma.

Connie Jones, a 40-year-old Black woman, had come for treatment requesting
help for her son Darryl, age 15. Darryl had two other siblings, Mary, age 10, and
Robert, age 9. Their father had died suddenly in a car accident 6 months earlier.
Darryl had been very angry and had been acting out since his death. He stayed out
late at night, was truant from school, and was often angry and hostile toward his
mother. Darryl had had a very problematic relationship with his father prior to his
death and had taken his loss “hard.” It was clear that the whole family was strug-
gling with this loss and had never filly mourned or shared their pain.


--- Page 11 ---
72 THE CULTURAL AND RACIAL CONTEXT

In a family session, the father’s death was discussed. Darryl reported that his
father had really “done wrong by them.” At the funeral, another woman had ap-
peared with a child 2 years younger than Darryl and reported that this was his fa
ther’s child. Darryl was furious. His mother reported that she had heard rumors
about her husband’s secret life but had never really confronted him or let the chil-
dren know. Darryl was finally able to tell his mother that he had felt betrayed at
having to find this out at a time like that (i.e., during the funeral). He was angry at
his father and at her. Once this issue was discussed openly by Mrs. Jones with
Darryl and the other children, they were able to talk openly about their hurt, their
anger, and their sadness at the death of their father. The family’s mourning process
could then begin.

Bowen (1976) has discussed the emotional shock wave that a death can
precipitate in a family. In many Black families, funerals are particularly emo-
tionally loaded because they are a time when these kinds of secrets often sur~
face. By helping the family to openly discuss their hurt and anger, an issue very
central, painful, and harmful to family functioning was defused and they could
begin to support each other through the mourning process.

The Discussion of “Secrets” in Family Therapy
with African American Families

Family therapists have been known to err in one of two directions in relation-
ship to family secrets with African American families. One type of error in-
volves opening up these secrets prematurely before a bond of trust has been es-
tablished. The other type of error has often been made by well-meaning
therapists who have been exposed to the cultural issues related to “dirty laun-
dry.” Some of these therapists have therefore been afraid to open up such issues
for fear of “losing the family.” Clearly, the key issue here is one of timing. It is
essential that the therapist join with the family well so that a bond of trust can
be formed. This creates an atmosphere in which even the most difficult issue
can be raised. The therapist can then make a decision as to which “secrets”
need to be opened and explored. This need for a careful joining with Black
families is crucial to overcoming resistance and to successful treatment.

This chapter has explored the diverse extended family patterns and the
role of informal adoptions that are so central to the lives of many African
American families. Within these complex kinship networks, it is extremely
important that roles be both flexible and clear. Sometimes, however, these roles
can become blurred or confused. The next chapter will explore in detail the
issue of role relationships in African American families.

4

Role Flexibility
and Boundary Confusion

Role relationships are very complex in many African American families, par-
ticularly those with an extended kinship system. This chapter explores differ-
ent aspects of those roles, including (1) role flexibility, (2) the roles of fathers in
African American families, (3) mothering roles in African American families,
and (4) the grandmother role. While this role flexibility is clearly a strength in
many families, it can lead to role confusion and boundary problems in some of
the African American families who come for treatment. The last part of this
chapter explores such problems as the “nonevolved” grandmother, the three-
generational family, and the parental child.

ROLE FLEXIBILITY

There is a great deal of reciprocity and role flexibility within both nuclear and
extended African American families. Hill (1972, 1999a) refers to this flexibility
as the “adaptability of family roles.” It was his work that described this flexibil-
ity as a source of “strength and stability.” Because of the economic realities
faced by many African American families, role flexibility developed as a sur-
vival mechanism. In order for both parents to work, Black women have some-
times had to act as the “father” and Black men as the “mother.” The previous
chapter has already established that other relatives such as grandmothers,
grandfathers, aunts, uncles, cousins, and so on, may assume parental roles. In
addition, when all of the adults are working, children are often required to as-
sume “parental child” roles necessary for family survival (Minuchin, 1974;
Nichols & Schwartz, 1998).

73
