--- Page 1 ---
Cultural Competence in
Trauma Therapy
Beyond the Flashback
Laura S. Brown
American Psychological Association
Washington, DC

--- Page 2 ---
Copyright © 2008 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved. Except
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, including, but not limited
to, the process of scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval system,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by
American Psychological Association
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.apa.org
To order
APA Order Department
P.O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20090-2984
Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
Online: www.apa.org/books/
E-mail: order@apa.org
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from
American Psychological Association
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, London
WC2E 8LU England
Typeset in Goudy by Stephen McDougal, Mechanicsville, MD
Printer: United Book Press, Inc., Baltimore, MD
Cover Designer: Naylor Design, Washington, DC
Technical/Production Editor: Marian Haggard
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such
opinions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American
Psychological Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Brown, Laura S.
Cultural competence in trauma therapy : beyond the flashback / Laura S. Brown.—1st ed.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4338-0337-6 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4338-0337-2 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Post-traumatic stress disorder—Treatment—Cross-cultural studies. 2. Psychic
trauma—Treatment—Cross-cultural studies. I. American Psychological Association.
II. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Stress Disorders, Post-Traumatic—therapy. 2. Cultural Diversity.
3. Psychotherapy—methods. WM 170 B878c 2008]
RC552.P67B764 2008
362.196'8521—dc22 2007043650
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition

--- Page 3 ---
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments vii
Introduction: Trauma, a Multicultural Reality 3
I. Culturally Competent Models of Trauma Treatment 21
Chapter 1. Knowing Difference or We're All Diverse
Here 23
Chapter 2. Living in Multiple Identities in the
Context of Trauma 49
Chapter 3. Entering the Healing Process 61
Chapter 4. Diversifying the Definition of Trauma 95
II. Contextual Paradigms for Understanding the Nature of
Trauma 113
Chapter 5. Trauma, Age, and Ageism 115
Chapter 6. Trauma, Sex, and Gender 131
Chapter 7. Trauma, Culture, Phenotype, and Ethnicity.. . 153
Chapter 8. Trauma and Sexual Orientation 169
Chapter 9. Living With Disabilities in the Context of
Trauma 181
Chapter 10. The Great Divide: Trauma and Social Class .. 197
Chapter 11. Migration and Dislocation 215

--- Page 4 ---
Chapter 12. Trauma and Systems of Meaning Making 227
III. Interpersonal and Psychotherapist Variables 243
Chapter 13. Weaving the Web of Support: Working
With Families and Communities and Caring
for Oneself 245
Conclusion: Looking Forward 255
Appendix: Guidelines to Inform Cultural Competence
in Practice 259
References 261
Index 277
About the Author 291
vi CONTENTS

--- Page 5 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book owes large debts of gratitude to my colleagues who have
thought long and hard about trauma and identity. I particularly wish to thank
Pamela Hays and Maria Root, whose paradigms for understanding identity
have deeply influenced my own thinking and work as a psychotherapist,
teacher, and writer. Special thanks are also due to my friends and colleagues
Judith Alpert, Lillian Comas-Diaz, Christine Courtois, Jennifer Freyd, Steve
Gold, Beverly Greene, Ken Pope, and Melba Vasquez, all of whom have
personally and professionally enriched me with their writing, thinking, and
friendship. There are many other colleagues whose work informs and edu-
cates me, but to attempt to remember and list all of them would take up an
entire volume. Among them are the leadership and workshop presenters at
the annual meetings of the International Society for Traumatic Stress Stud-
ies and the authors publishing in the Journal of Traumatic Stress, Dissociation,
Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, and Journal of Trauma Psychology. My as-
sociates in the Society for the Psychology of Women; the Society for the
Psychological Study of Ethnic Minority Issues; the Society for the Psycho-
logical Study of Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Issues of the American Psycho-
logical Association (APA); and the Division of Trauma Psychology of APA
as well as the many colleagues who have consulted with me in the last 3
decades are all influences on my writing and thinking.
My research assistant, Tracy Bryan, was an invaluable contributor to
this process. Her diligent search for the scholarly literature on culture and
trauma was eye-opening for us both (in large part because of how hard it was
to find anything that I hadn't read already on this topic, although I'm sure
that publishing this book will bring those whose work we didn't find yet in
touch with us). Tracy is a gifted writer whose work psychotherapists will all
be seeing in a few years, including an article coauthored with me in 2007 on
feminist therapy and self-inflicted violence (Brown & Bryan, 2007).
vn

--- Page 6 ---
None of this would have been written without the privilege of having
known and met many survivors of trauma in my roles as psychotherapist and
forensic psychologist. These people have been willing to tell me their stories,
have allowed me to be witness and participant in their healing processes, and
have taught me everything I know about being a psychotherapist. The people
I work with are amazing human beings. Despite confusion, pain, and terror,
they have struggled to have lives of dignity and decency, practicing compas-
sion for others, although initially they struggle to do this for themselves.
They are my heroes because in the face of endless invitations from life to
become violent and abusive or simply callous and nihilistic, they are instead
kind and loving. I can name none of them because to all of them I owe a debt
of confidentiality, but I thank each one of them; they know who they are.
Finally, no writer exists in a vacuum. My partner, Lynn, has been un-
failingly supportive of the activities that made this book happen, including
those that temporarily took me away from home or from her while I holed up
in my study or on the couch and wrote for hours. My beloved dog, Schmulik,
who has worked as my copsychotherapist since he arrived in my life 12 years
ago, has shown me repeatedly that what trauma survivors benefit from most
is hope and the desire to connect, something he offers to clients every work-
ing day. Finally, my thanks to APA's Books Department, especially Susan
Reynolds, who solicited this manuscript and was patient with my somewhat
delayed production of it.
viii ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

--- Page 7 ---
Cultural Competence in
Trauma Therapy

--- Page 8 ---
INTRODUCTION: TRAUMA,
A MULTICULTURAL REALITY
Trauma and its psychic aftereffects have a texture. The experience con-
veys meanings that derive from personal histories; cultural heritages; and the
social, political, and spiritual contexts in which the painful event happens.
Even such an apparently neutral trauma as a natural disaster or a car accident
can have a complex and multidetermined meaning structure, because the
emotional impact of trauma is not merely about what happened in the mo-
ment but also reflects what occurred before and what transpires next. A
psychotherapist's ability to understand how a trauma survivor's multiple iden-
tities and social contexts lend meaning to the experience of a trauma and the
process of recovery comprises the central factor of culturally competent trauma
practice. This volume is an extended discussion of how psychotherapists can
develop such understandings that are sophisticated, thoughtful, and reflec-
tive of the current paradigms of identity and culture.
At the core, trauma is simply trauma. An assault, an earthquake, and
combat are all recognizable as events that threaten safety and shatter as-
sumptions about the nature of the world and one's relationship to it. Trauma
of some sort is extraordinarily common even in a supposedly safe place, with
research on the U.S. population suggesting that as many as one half of all

--- Page 9 ---
residents have experienced exposure to a major traumatic stressor, most com-
monly some kind of interpersonal violence (Briere & Scott, 2006).
Trauma, no matter how endemic, is never generic and never the same
for any 2 people. Each experience of an encounter with a traumatic stressor is
unique and is given unique meaning by the life history of the person to whom
it occurs. Some of that unique meaning arises from the cultural and group
memberships in which a person participates and from the multiple, inter-
secting identities defining each person's individual sense of selfhood. When
the trauma is of human design, the most common type, some of the meaning
ascribed to the trauma by its targets will arise from the cultural and group
memberships and identities of the perpetrators. The relationships of those
reference groups, both in the present day and historically, will also give color,
texture, and specificity to the trauma; those social and contextual factors can
make a wound deeper, extend suffering, become obstacles to healing, or al-
low even the worst of psychic wounds to heal quickly.
RESPONDING TO TRAUMA COMPETENTLY
Responding to trauma in a culturally competent manner requires the
psychotherapist to understand how those added meanings that derive from
context and identity make each instance of trauma unique. It also requires
the psychotherapist's awareness of her or his own identities, biases, and par-
ticipations in cultural hierarchies of power and privilege, powerlessness and
disadvantage, as well as personal experiences of trauma. Failure to bring cul-
tural competence to the table can lead to missteps in genuinely helping trauma
survivors or worse can result in deepening the wounds of trauma, creating
secondary and tertiary traumas that are more painful than the original be-
cause they are correctly appraised by victims and survivors as unnecessary
wounds.
This volume reflects my long interest in two topics and their conver-
gence in my own work. I have worked since the beginning of my career as a
psychologist with survivors of trauma. At first I did so accidentally, not real-
izing how common trauma was in the lives of people in emotional distress.
By the early 1980s I was intentionally engaging with trauma survivors, with a
deepening focus on what Judith Lewis Herman (1992) called "complex
trauma." Complex trauma represents the inter- and intrapersonal effects of
multiple and repeated exposures to varieties of interpersonal violence and
violation, an experience that is becoming recognized as far more common in
the United States than the one-episode traumatic stressor initially envisioned
by diagnostic manuals.
As a psychologist trained in the early 1970s, a period in which trauma
was virtually never considered a component of distress, I had to learn to
uncover and listen to the hidden and silenced stories of trauma that my cli-
4 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 10 ---
ents carried to me. I frequently did not know what I was seeing and hearing
when people told me about trauma. I did not yet know the ways in which
people communicated their traumatic experiences before they could name
them and use language to talk about them. My training as a psychologist had
taught me to ignore or trivialize experiences of trauma or to interpret the
distress that people shared with me as evidence of something entirely other
than the aftermath of trauma exposure, thus the accidental nature of my
specialization. It was only because 1 had the good fortune to be able to hear
those stories that I was then willing to intentionally pursue trauma as a topic.
Additionally, since the beginning of my career I have been involved
with the development of feminist practice, which in turn has led me to an
interest in broader visions of cultural competence in psychology. Feminist
psychology has been uniquely situated within the realm of clinical practice
as a result of its attention to issues of power and social location and to how
people's experiences of gender, culture, social class, sexuality, and other ex-
periences that denote inter- and intrapersonal power or powerlessness might
affect both distress and resilience in response to traumatic stress. Because
one core aspect of how trauma functions as a source of psychic wounding
is that trauma induces powerlessness and loss both of real control and self-
protective illusions of control, a theory of therapy that centers its attention
on power is likely to have much useful to say to its practitioners and others
about trauma.
Like other similar critical psychologies, including multicultural psycholo-
gies, queer psychologies, and liberation psychologies, feminist psychology and
the psychotherapists informed by it have also been more likely than psycho-
therapists of other orientations to knowingly and intentionally encounter
the survivors of traumas. This is because feminist psychotherapists' theories
exposed narratives of trauma even in eras when such stories were forbidden
or hidden in the larger psychological discourse (Comas-Diaz & Jacobsen,
2001; Fox & Prilleltensky, 1997). As psychotherapists open to telling truths
about the human experience of powerlessness, critical psychologists created
the psychological spaces where trauma survivors could speak their truths.
This is what happened for me and many of my feminist psychotherapist friends
and colleagues; we communicated our willingness to hear truths, and people
told us about their hidden experiences of terror and violation. It is not sur-
prising that almost all of the authors who first wrote about the traumas of
interpersonal violence, the most hidden yet pervasive of human traumatic
stressors, were pioneers of feminist therapy such as Judith Lewis Herman,
Florence Rush, and Lenore E. Walker.
In the wake of Hurricane Katrina (which blew through the U.S. Gulf
Coast a month after I proposed this book to the American Psychological
Association [APA], making my work more urgent and, sadly, timely), the
intersection of culture and trauma has become increasingly visible to every-
one in the mental health field as well as to anyone who could turn on a
INTRODUCTION 5

--- Page 11 ---
television or open a newspaper in the United States since the fall of 2005.
One of APA's many humanitarian responses to that disaster was promotion
of the awareness that the mostly poor, mostly African American and Acadian
victims of that storm would need not simply posttrauma support from mental
health professionals but specifically required culturally competent posttrauma
support that avoided reenacting wounds rooted in racist and classist assump-
tions about the world (Dass-Brailford, 2006). Even the apparently neutral
trauma of a hurricane does not have neutral meaning for its victims; nor do
the outcomes of such a trauma fail to aggravate old wounds of oppression and
discrimination or underscore and enhance old histories of privilege.
THE SECONDARY TRAUMA OF CONTEXT AND CULTURE
Additionally, as the entire culture gained access to Katrina survivors'
stories through such media presentations as Spike Lee's (2006) post-Katrina
documentary When the Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts, people also got
to see how an already devastating yet apparently morally neutral act of na-
ture can be more traumatizing when it is disruptive to culturally based coping
and resiliency strategies that were dependent on the presence of coeval com-
munities now scattered to every part of the continent. There is no accident
in the fact that this event, experienced by all who lived on the Gulf Coast,
has had differential impact on survivors based almost solely on interlocking
issues of ethnicity and social class.
Speaking of the impoverished Katrina evacuees sheltering in Houston
who had suffered grievous losses of home, family, culture, and connection,
former First Lady Barbara Bush commented to a news reporter during her
visit to the Houston Astrodome,
What I'm hearing, which is sort of scary, is that they all want to stay in
Texas. Everyone is so overwhelmed by the hospitality. And so many of
the people in the area here, you know, were underprivileged anyway, so
this [is] working very well for them. ("Barbara Bush Calls Evacuees Bet-
ter Off," 2005)
Perhaps intending well, she wounded the evacuees and many of those simply
hearing her words on TV in a way that the hurricane alone could not have.
She seemed to be implying that the lives and experiences of the poor and
disenfranchised survivors of the storm were lacking in value. Imagine being
told that living as a displaced person in makeshift accommodations is an
upgrade for your life. The presence of this secondary, tertiary, and additional
trauma connected to the trauma of the flood was revealed to the entire Ameri-
can public. Mrs. Bush appeared to be delivering a clear message to Katrina
survivors that what was important about their lives—their unique cultures
and communities; their rich traditions; the homes, no matter how small, that
6 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 12 ---
they had struggled to own and to build—were of little value in an American
society that regards lives in poverty as lives lacking in worth. The destruc-
tion of those communities by the floodwaters was apparently seen by her as a
good thing, rather than as the heartbreaking drowning of a culture as rich in
traditions as it was poor in cash.
What is striking about this episode was not that it happened nor that
secondary institutionalized trauma was heaped on the pain of another trau-
matic stressor as a result of cultural insensitivity, but rather that it was done
publicly and so was visible to all. Secondary trauma inflicted by agencies,
researchers, and mental health providers as a result of absence of cultural
competence has been painfully common but rarely is committed and broad-
cast on the national news; it usually happens in private, behind the doors of
therapy offices and social service agencies, in shelters that define families to
exclude family members not related by blood or law, in funding for posttrauma
care that has arbitrary end dates reflecting some generic sense of how long
trauma recovery should take, in research that fails to ask about identity while
inquiring into symptom frequency and then interprets those numbers out of
context. How trauma survivors are responded to by their helpers and the
biases held by those who purport to assist them make a difference in whether
and how those survivors will heal. When a psychotherapist lacks cultural
competence, the capacity to understand the complex human identities that
inform each survivor's relationship to trauma, that psychotherapist is at greater
risk to unintentionally inflict secondary traumas on clients; cultural compe-
tence, conversely, may speed healing by connecting trauma survivors to their
own resources and honoring the inner and outer realities informing trauma
and its meanings.
The Katrina disaster thus also made more generally visible, but did not
invent, the necessity for thinking about trauma within a framework of cul-
tural competence. Human beings are entirely human and share a universal
DNA, brain structure, and capacity for language and meaning making, each
of which is implicated in the trauma response. Humans, trauma survivors
and not, are also entirely the individual, unique, infinite intersections of
their cultures, their genders, their ethnicities and phenotypes, and all of the
other many factors that contribute to multiple and overlapping identities
held by each and every person. Trauma does not happen to a generic human
being any more than it is generic itself, and the ways in which humans trans-
late their inner biological states of posttraumatic disequilibrium into out-
ward expressions of distress are strongly affected by culture and context.
To date, few of the excellent psychotherapeutic models that have been
developed for working with trauma survivors have intentionally taken into
account this diversity and complexity of human identity and experience as it
informs the encounter with trauma. Although the list in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed., text rev.; DSM-IV-TR; Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2000) of so-called "culture-bound syndromes"
INTRODUCTION 7

--- Page 13 ---
is replete with posttraumatic responses framed in culturally specific manners,
no editor of that important volume has connected the dots in writing. A
trauma-savvy or culture-savvy reader may do so; but in the absence of those
intellectual frameworks, the relationship of trauma to such phenomena as
ataque de nervios is submerged, requiring skills at uncovering and
contextualizing to be correctly understood as a form of posttrauma response.
Additionally, although psychotherapists working with specific target group
populations have occasionally proposed culturally specific paradigms for work-
ing with trauma in those settings (e.g., Marsella, Friedman, Gerrity, &
Scurfield, 1996), few of those interventions have been mainstreamed into
the work of trauma experts in North America; they are special treatments for
special populations.
THE DISCONNECTION BETWEEN TRAUMA STUDIES
AND CULTURAL COMPETENCE
It is surprising and ironic that this disconnection between the fields of
trauma studies and cultural competence exists. Although the mental health
disciplines have had at best an uneasy and ambivalent relationship with trauma
as a topic, the modern field of traumatic stress studies in psychology and
related disciplines was founded largely by social justice activists like me who
cut their teeth in the 1960s and 1970s in movements against the Vietnamese
War and for women's equality and by European and Israeli colleagues living
in the aftermath of World War II and the Nazi Holocaust. The very diagno-
sis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was lobbied into the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (3rd ed.; American Psychiatric As-
sociation, 1980) by a somewhat uneasy coalition of antiwar Veterans Ad-
ministration staff, some of them veterans of Vietnam themselves, and femi-
nist psychotherapists from the front lines of the rape trauma and domestic
violence movements. It might have been reasonable to assume that these
socially conscious professionals, already deeply attuned to some forms of so-
cial injustice, would have looked next to issues of racism, classism,
heterosexism, and other forms of oppressive inequality as they tried to en-
hance their comprehension of how trauma affected human lives; but that
never occurred.
Why this next step did not happen has been a puzzle that writing this
book has forced me to explore. As is true for most group phenomena, I be-
lieve that there are many reasons for this neglect of intentional multicul-
turalism, most of them benign and stemming from the same source as more
general problems of modern aversive racism, classism, and heterosexism in
progressive social movements as well as within the discipline of psychology
(Bowes, 2007). Interrogating race, class, culture, and sexuality, by which I
mean thinking critically and asking difficult questions about assumptions
8 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 14 ---
that are taken as truth in dominant culture, is threatening and induces shame
in members of dominant groups, a category including the majority of psycho-
therapists. The critical analysis of systemic forms of oppression requires those
in positions of dominance and privilege, such as psychologists and other psy-
chotherapists, to acknowledge the social locations of greater power stem-
ming from their professional training and status and to see themselves as
benefiting from oppression through the privilege inherent in those roles,
whether or not they actively oppress others.
This stance of admitting to privilege is not a comfortable position for
any psychotherapist whose biases, such as they are, are mostly covert and
well hidden from her- or himself, taking the form of what Gaertner and
Dovidio (1977,1986, 2005) have called "modern" or "aversive" bias, a form
of bias that is denied by and invisible to its practitioners. Aversive bias has
rarely been seen as the sort of very problematic countertransferential prob-
lem that it is because so much shame attaches to bias despite its nearly
universal persistence. It is much easier for mental health professionals to
be in the cultural role of supposedly neutral yet caring bystanders, to see
themselves as good people who, because they are not intentionally perpe-
trating oppression, are thus not involved in it nor necessarily responsible
for its alleviation through the mechanism of their work. To tell oneself the
truth about how bias lurks in one's all-too-human nonconscious affective
responses and one's personal symbologies can be a painful exercise in hon-
esty and self-scrutiny.
Interrogating trauma and asking oneself to look closely at what its en-
demic nature means about the human condition are equally threatening.
When people stare trauma in the face, it becomes impossible to engage in
defenses against the reality that horrifying, unpredictable, disruptive things
happen routinely in the lives of innocent human beings, and worse, that
those things can happen to us, a phenomenon of painful awareness that
Pearlman and Saakvitne (1995) have called "vicarious traumatization."
Working with trauma requires psychotherapists to get up close and personal
with stigma, which can and sometimes does rub off. Trauma therapy is not
mainstream to training in any mental health discipline, even though some
form of trauma is implicated as a psychosocial risk factor for most Axis I and
many Axis II diagnoses (Briere &. Scott, 2006). As Alpert (2006) noted in
her comments in the inaugural issue of The Trauma Psychologist, scientists
and clinicians in psychology do not generally familiarize themselves with the
literature on trauma; those who do risk being seen as strange or suspect and
are perhaps themselves secretly trauma survivors (which reads professionally
as somehow less qualified to treat trauma because of bias or unhealed psychic
wounds).
Each of these intellectual and clinical enterprises on the margins of
society and psychology requires its practitioners to tell uncomfortable and
often painful truths about aspects of the social status quo. Trauma and op-
INTRODUCTION 9

--- Page 15 ---
pressive biases are close to the top of the list of what therapists generally do
not like to talk about (Pope, Sonne, & Greene, 2006). If therapists do talk
about trauma, they wish to speak of these painful and frightening topics from
a safe intellectual distance, which is a stance antithetical to that necessary to
work psychotherapeutically with traumatized people. From my professional
location inside the circle of trauma psychotherapists and researchers who
have taken the leadership in the field, most of whom appear to be of Euro-
pean descent whether living in North America, Australia, Israel, or Europe
itself, it is apparent that many of us believed by that working with trauma
survivors we were already doing social justice work and that trauma was suf-
ficiently generic so as to not necessitate delving deeply into questions of
cultural difference.
CULTURALLY COMPETENT TRAUMA THERAPISTS
It has also been true that for many well-intentioned Euro-American
clinicians, diversity has been a topic reserved for those who work with spe-
cial populations and for the clinicians who are themselves members of those
very groups. Etic approaches to working with groups, which prescribed cer-
tain psychotherapeutic strategies for Asian Americans and certain others for
African Americans and so on, although initially revolutionary because of
simply raising consciousness about race and culture, eventually had the ef-
fect of ghettoizing discourse about ethnicity into the special populations class
that was and still frequently is an optional course in the training of mental
health professionals. Diversity came to be quite narrowly defined in mental
health contexts; it was the study of the other, with each group placed in its
own box. Race and culture were almost the only forms of human diversity
addressed in the mental health realms for many years, and culture was de-
fined in terms of those variables. Although feminist psychologists and other
feminist psychotherapists have foregrounded gender, and lesbian, gay, and
bisexual-affirmative practitioners began to make sexuality core to some com-
ponents of the psychotherapy conversation, social class was and remains deeply
neglected as a psychological topic (Lott & Bullock, 2007). Disability, immi-
gration status, experiences of colonization, and other social locations have
informed people's experiences of identity, and thus of trauma, and they have
also largely gone unaddressed within the mental health discourse. Genocide
perpetrated against Europeans has been of interest in the trauma field; geno-
cide perpetrated by Europeans against indigenous people as colonial forces
invaded the Western Hemisphere and the Global South has for the most
part not been a subject of the field's attentions if one simply adds up the
number of publications and conference presentations. The descendants and
beneficiaries of the colonizers are among those controlling the professional
discourse far more often than are the descendants of the colonized.
J 0 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 16 ---
Trauma psychotherapists and specialists have not been an exception to
this norm of disengagement from issues of human diversity within the con-
text of U.S. culture. Ironically, the field of trauma studies has been interna-
tional from its inception, owing largely to European and Middle Eastern heri-
tages of war, the Holocaust, and ethnic strife of a longevity unknowable in a
country as young as the United States. The journals and conferences of the
traumatic stress studies field are well populated with materials about trauma
from earthquakes in Armenia, wars in Kuwait or firestorms in Australia. In-
ternationalism has been the trauma field's multiculturalism. In the largest
published volume currently available on the topic of cultural diversity in
trauma studies, the most frequent focus was on cultures outside of the United
States or on individuals who refuged to the United States from other cul-
tures. I can find more information about disaster survivors in the developing
Spanish-speaking world than on the systemic trauma exposures experienced
by persons of the many and diverse Spanish-speaking heritages living in the
United States. This focus, although valuable in and of itself, has contributed
to a neglect of multicultural competencies as regards issues of diversity in
U.S. trauma survivors.
Whatever the causes, the dearth of formal commentary on what consti-
tutes culturally competent trauma practice is not sustainable if trauma prac-
tice is to respond to the realities of trauma survivors who seek professional
care. In this book I attempt to take one step in the direction of filling that
lacuna by interweaving a paradigm for thinking about human diversity with
knowledge from the field of trauma therapy to yield a framework for cultur-
ally competent practice with trauma survivors. The goal of this book is not
to produce psychotherapists with etic knowledge, that is, specific knowl-
edge about how to work with a specific population or their particular trauma
histories. Instead, I invite my readers to an epistemology of diversity for
understanding trauma and its intersections with humans' multiple and di-
verse identities.
EMIC VERSUS ETIC DISCOURSE OF CULTURAL COMPETENCE
There are numerous reasons for my decision to frame this volume within
an emic discourse of cultural competence. First, etic models are themselves
plagued by inattention to within-group diversities. To say "Here's how to
work with a Bajoran trauma survivor" (Bajorans being a Star Trek ethnic
group with a cultural history of trauma) ignores questions such as, is this a
male, female, or intersexed Bajoran? Did this person live through the intern-
ment camps or is she or he the child of someone who did so? Did she or he
participate in the resistance against the Cardassians (yet another Star Trek
ethnic group who serve as a placeholder for perpetrators of oppression) ? Did
she or he see friends die? Spend time in prison? Refuge to another planet to
INTRODUCTION 11

--- Page 17 ---
seek physical safety? Is this Bajoran lesbian, gay, bisexual, or a transgendered
person? Is she or he a strong adherent of the dominant Bajoran faith? As the
list of questions grows, so does the complexity of issues facing psychothera-
pist and client. Yet these complexities are always present whether or not
they are acknowledged, and the interplay and interaction between them and
the trauma experience will have deep and lasting impact on how a person
relates to what has happened and approaches the recovery process.
Etic models reduce people to one dimension of their identity and not
always the dimension most strongly felt by trauma survivors themselves. My
Bajoran client's trauma may have everything to do with being Bajoran or
very little; her or his resources for responding to the trauma may also be
affected or not by ethnicity and culture. If I only see the large dangling earring
and the red clothing and immediately call up the "how to treat Bajorans" chap-
ter from my inner database, I may miss what is important for me to know about
this particular Bajoran's experiences of trauma. And I have not even begun to
consider what it means that I am a human of this planet offering my services
to this ethnically different human of another planet or to ask what we might
represent to one another in symbolic nonconscious layers of our encounter.
Representation, both individual and cultural/historical, constitutes two other
vitally important dimensions of culturally competent practice.
Consequently, in this book I offer an epistemology of culturally aware
and sensitive trauma competence of an emic variety. This strategy for ad-
dressing diversity teaches psychotherapists how to think about human differ-
ence, to develop algorithms for solving conundrums about diversity, and to
consider themselves and their own diverse identities as they populate the
social ecology of psychotherapy with trauma survivors. These models do at-
tend to the various components of identity but with the goal of understand-
ing how they merge within each person. The epistemology I use in this vol-
ume owes a large debt to the work of Pamela Hays (2001, 2008). Hays's model
for understanding diversity in clinical context, which she calls ADDRESS-
ING, is one that intentionally engages with multiple and intersecting identi-
ties in client and psychotherapist—age, acquired and developmental disabil-
ity, religion, ethnicity, social class, sexual orientation, indigenous heritage,
national origin, and gender. I draw on the ADDRESSING paradigm as an
algorithm for thinking about human diversity and about how psychothera-
pists working with trauma survivors can understand their clients and them-
selves in terms of the intersection of trauma and multiple locations of social
and personal identity.
TRAUMA IN THE LIVES OF PSYCHOTHERAPISTS
It is important to note that I refer to understanding diversity in both
clients and psychotherapists. An assumption about what constitutes cultur-
J 2 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 18 ---
ally competent practice, which recurs in this book, is that such practice in-
volves knowledge of one's own multiple identities and their meanings. Along
with one's sex; gender; and various ethnic, sexual orientation, cultural, and
social class identities, there is also the question of how trauma is a part of
one's identity. Some readers are trauma survivors. Research by Pope and
Feldman-Summers (1992) has shown that approximately 30% of practicing
psychologists admit to a history of childhood abuse. When I teach about
trauma, I urge those in the audience to begin to speak of trauma survivors as
we rather than they, given the ubiquity of this experience in psychothera-
pists' lives. Add in other common experiences of trauma such as combat,
natural disaster, assault and sexual assault in adulthood, and traumatic loss,
and the numbers of trauma survivors reading these lines grow.
Some readers will not have had a personal experience of trauma yet; yet
because trauma is potential as well as actual. My colleagues living in New
Orleans who reeled shell-shocked in the wake of Katrina, their homes, of-
fices, and schools swept away by the floodwaters, were not trauma survivors
(that I knew of, although there is a strong unspoken ban among psychothera-
pists and academicians about speaking of their own personal trauma histo-
ries) on the day that I agreed to write this book in early August 2005. When
1 saw them at APA's annual conference in New Orleans 1 year later they
were trauma survivors, and for some of these people that change was visible
and palpable. Katrina survivor had become an indelible component of their
identities in that short timeframe.
Other readers are the children of trauma survivors, living with legacies
of intergenerational transmission of trauma experiences (Danieli, 1998).
Readers who are American Indian, African American, Jewish, Khmer, Na-
tive Hawaiian, or Armenian, to name but a few groups that have been on the
receiving end of genocidal violence, are descendants of trauma survivors and
of cultures marked by trauma. Readers who are South Asian may come from
families that have been affected by the social upheaval and death attendant
on the establishment of India and Pakistan. There is a plethora of additional
examples; trauma has been pervasive in human experience.
They are we when speaking of trauma and its survivors. To work in a
culturally competent manner with trauma each psychotherapist must be will-
ing to understand her or his own participation, directly or historically, in the
realities of trauma. Human beings evolved in terribly dangerous environ-
ments, surrounded by predators, and were likely to die before they reached
age 40. The capacity for a response to trauma is built into the evolution of
the species Homo sapiens; one's specific personal heritage is what creates the
texture of one's trauma response.
Each individual is also diverse and possessed of multiple identities. Ev-
ery person has a sex, a gender, a spiritual or meaning-making system (which
need not include a divine being), and a culture with which she or he identi-
fies, however loosely. If one's ancestors came from Europe or Asia to North
INTRODUCTION 13

--- Page 19 ---
America, one is most likely a descendant of immigrants or refugees who ar-
rived here to the chilly welcome that has greeted everyone from the Irish of
the 1800s to the Eastern European Jews of the early 1900s to today's South
Asian computer engineers and undocumented Guatemalans. Some came as
indentured servants, sold into labor. If one's family came from South and
Central America, one's ancestors may have crawled under the barbed wire
fence at the border. Some ancestors came in steerage; others flew first class
on a 747; but all experienced the loss of culture and language that is trauma
for some.
Many individuals are also perpetrators. Some are the descendants of
slaveholders, of soldiers who shot women and children in this country's geno-
cidal wars against its indigenous people, or of those who imprisoned or tor-
tured others in the countries from which they came. Many people have an-
cestors who suffered what Shay (1995) has called the "moral injury" of being
trauma perpetrators, and in many cases that was traumatic to them and to
the family cultures that they created and of which later generations are the
inheritors. Some families served in the governments of Batista's Cuba, Stalin's
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Hitler's Germany, or in South Africa
under apartheid. Some individuals' ancestors have been beaten; some indi-
viduals' ancestors administered those beatings. Some people's ancestors in-
clude both; many African Americans carry the genes of a slaveholder great-
great-grandfather who raped their enslaved great-great-grandmother. And
people from positions of dominance and privilege can perpetrate oppression
on others every day in their current lives without knowing or thinking of it
(Vasquez, 2007). Perpetrator and victim consciousness live within people's
cultures, families, and psychological realities. They are a component of our
constructions of identity
If a psychotherapist does not understand her or his own diverse identi-
ties and the ways in which those identities include experiences of trauma,
then no training in the application of eye-movement desensitization and
reprocessing or prolonged exposure therapy or cognitive reprocessing will
allow that psychotherapist to be culturally competent. The absence of cul-
tural competence will detract from a psychotherapist's effectiveness as she or
he applies these empirically supported modalities for reducing the distressing
symptoms caused by trauma exposure because that lack will affect the quality
of the therapy relationship. Research on common factors in psychotherapy
has shown that for any intervention, a large percentage of the outcome vari-
ance is accounted for by the therapeutic alliance (Norcross & Lambert, 2006).
Cultural competence enhances a psychotherapist's capacity to build alliances
and enact the common factors of good psychotherapy even with those cli-
ents who appear to resemble their therapists in every way. I urge readers to
think about trauma's meanings for psychotherapists as well as for the clients.
As noted previously, the field of trauma studies is a place in which it is
disingenuous to speak of us, the psychotherapists, and them, the clients. We
14 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 20 ---
are they more often than psychotherapists like to think, and if psychothera-
pists tell themselves this truth, they come one step closer to cultural compe-
tence by acknowledging the ubiquity of trauma in human personal histories.
This is a difficult task with which to engage. At a large international
meeting of trauma specialists that I attended in the midst of this writing, I
never once heard trauma survivors referred to by other than the distancing
third person, except for one distinguished presenter who, already full of gravitas
and thus unassailable in his professional credentials, set aside his prepared
remarks to speak about his own personal trauma history living in a country
perpetually at war. Everyone who knows of this man and his work knows that
he was born and raised in Jerusalem. As a Jewish Israeli, his trauma history is
implicit in his citizenship. But for him to speak of it directly and explicitly
was a violation of unspoken norms.
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING IGNORANT
In her classic science fiction novel The Left Hand of Darkness, Ursula
Kroeber LeGuin (1969) has taken her readers to the planet Gethen where all
of the humans are intersexed and capable of being both male and female at
different times in their lives and of being both and neither most of the time.
Through the eyes of her protagonist Genly Ai, a middle-years adult male
who is an apparently heterosexual, highly educated human of African de-
scent from the reader's own third rock from a star, she has offered readers the
opportunity to imagine how meanings are changed when variables that seem
important and essential to their identities and understandings of one an-
other become important and essential in entirely different and almost un-
fathomable ways.
On Gethen, sex is such a variable. Genly Ai cannot tolerate being un-
able to know which sex a person is, even though each Gethenian is usually
neuter outside of a monthly estrous phase. Sex, and knowing a person's sex, is
central to Genly's ways of relating; not trained as a psychotherapist, but rather
as an anthropologist and diplomat, he is unable to set this strategy for orga-
nizing human experience aside. As a consequence of his insistence on put-
ting Gethenians into boxes that do not reflect their lived realities, he makes
continuous and dangerous errors of judgment, which form the themes of the
book's drama and tragedy.
Psychotherapists are often like Genly Ai; they struggle with the ambi-
guity of their clients' identities and attempt to put them into the categories
that they know and with which they are familiar. Trauma frequently has the
effect of creating new and difficult-to-comprehend identities for clients, the
identity of being broken, spoiled, dirty, and damaged. Sometimes those iden-
tities appear to make no sense to psychotherapists' preconceived notions of
how humans organize identity, but they not only make sense for clients but
INTRODUCTION 15

--- Page 21 ---
also convey important information about the meaning of a trauma experi-
ence in someone's life. Culturally competent trauma practice requires that
psychotherapists stretch their minds and let go of their categories so that
they can open themselves to those parameters of identity experienced by the
people with whom they work.
Another theme to be sounded here as 1 discuss how trauma intersects
with identity is that no person has one identity. Drawing on models of iden-
tity development created by theorists observing the lives of people with mul-
tiple racial identities (Root, 2000, 2004a, 2004b), in this volume 1 encourage
psychotherapists to understand trauma as it impacts each person's multiple
identities, both additively and interactively. Each individual has a gender,
and each individual has a gender as expressed through social class, age co-
hort, culture, and so on. When trauma intersects those multiple, overlap-
ping, and sometimes apparently conflicting facets of selfhood, culturally com-
petent practice requires psychotherapists to think not only of the easiest to
see or most prominent aspect of identity but also about the intersection with
the intersections, a sort of three-dimensional Venn diagram.
This leads me to another important point made by LeGuin. At one
juncture in her narrative, LeGuin sends Genly Ai on a visit to a Gethenian
religious sanctuary where practitioners of the art of Foretelling live. He ap-
proaches a member of the group and proclaims, "I am very ignorant." The
Foreteller gently suggests to Ai that he is boasting, for in the philosophy of the
Foretellers, ignorance is wisdom. So too with culturally competent trauma treat-
ment; great ignorance, the stance of knowing that one does not know and thus
openness to being informed, is a core capacity of the emotional competence
informing culturally sensitive work. This is likely equally as difficult as being
willing to interrogate one's own identities in relationship to trauma. The cul-
ture of modem mental health professions, with its reliance on a stance of em-
pirical logical positivism, assumes that the psychotherapist is the expert who
knows how to decode and explain a client's reality. Claiming ignorance is
profoundly countercultural for people with doctorates, psychologists like me,
or other professionals with advanced degrees and years of training.
Consequently another important goal of this book is to help each reader
to become more ignorant, and thus wiser, about working with trauma survi-
vors. After 3 decades of working intentionally with trauma I can say with
utter certainty that 1 know that I have no idea of how any particular person
will have experienced and made sense, or not, of her or his traumatic experi-
ences. The clients I have worked with have taught me a great deal about
what they have done to survive and thrive, and I have been able to amalgam-
ate that knowledge into forms that function as useful heuristics, but no more
than that. I have learned that my capacities as a psychotherapist and my
ability to apply one or the other intervention effectively or to use my heuris-
tics on behalf of any specific person are slightly less important than my will-
ingness to stand in a position of ignorance in relationship to my client's suf-
16 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 22 ---
fering as well as her or his resilience, capacities, and struggles to make mean-
ing in the wake of trauma. In that position of ignorance I am able both to
join my client in intersubjective experience of ambiguity and noncontrol
and also to relinquish my needs to act as if I, the psychotherapist, am im-
mune to the vicissitudes of human existence of which trauma is only one.
AN OVERVIEW OF THIS VOLUME
This book's purpose is to generate in the reader the capacity to deliver
culturally competent treatment to survivors of trauma. This book should not
be read as a comprehensive text about trauma treatment or a comprehensive
text about cultural competence. It is an introduction and an invitation. In
attempting to adequately introduce readers to this topic in sufficient depth
to be useful, I have chosen to omit large territories in both intellectual are-
nas. Everything written here presupposes that the reader has a basic familiar-
ity with the diagnosis of PTSD and the ways in which the full range of post-
traumatic symptoms can mimic a range of other diagnoses, including
depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and dissociative phenomena.
In chapters 1 and 2,1 bring readers into the world of culturally compe-
tent models of psychotherapy. Here I go more deeply into Hays's (2001, 2007)
ADDRESSING model and offer an extended version of that model that may
be particularly useful in working with survivors of trauma. I explore how
identity develops in the context of multiple, intersecting, and sometimes
conflicting social locations and how trauma occurring at any point of iden-
tity development itself intersects with those other identity variables. In these
chapters I invite readers to consider how the response to trauma emerges
within the context of identity.
In chapter 3,1 briefly review some common approaches to working with
trauma in psychotherapy and discuss how cultural competence might inform
their applications, emphasizing the process of therapy intake and
transtheoretical paradigms of working with trauma survivors. I strongly en-
courage readers who wish to become more familiar with the topic of trauma
treatment in general to delve further into sources referenced in chapter 3
regarding general paradigms and published guidelines for treatment of trauma
sequelae. Working with trauma is a labor of both head and heart; specific,
focused training in working with trauma within either a formal educational
setting or through postgraduate continuing education is necessary for effec-
tive, ethical, and competent psychotherapy practice with trauma survivors.
Ongoing consultation and supervision and copious applications of self-care,
all of which are core to competent practice in the realities of trauma, cannot
be acquired through reading. Doing culturally competent psychotherapy with
any client is similarly not something acquired simply intellectually; this book
should be a starting point, something that provokes the reader to think.
INTRODUCTION 17

--- Page 23 ---
An additional goal of chapter 3 is to invite the reader to a compe-
tency-based view of trauma survivors. As I say to my clients who are casti-
gating themselves for being symptomatic, "You arrived here alive." It can
be difficult for psychotherapist and client alike to see a person who is pro-
foundly impaired by flashbacks, numbness, and hyperreactivity as compe-
tent. Many survivors of interpersonal violence believe themselves to have
been weak because they did not escape or they succumbed to posttrauma
distress. Nonetheless, a competency-based viewpoint about clients consti-
tutes a foundation of culturally competent trauma practice, in part because
some of the apparent symptoms of posttrauma response are actually indi-
vidually and/or culturally informed coping strategies. As psychotherapists
know from the behavior change literature, people are more likely to feel
hopeful about the possibility of their own transformation when they realize
that what therapy is asking of them is not the acquisition of some new and
entirely foreign skill but rather the expansion of a skill already in the be-
havioral repertoire.
In chapter 4, I expose readers to a diversity of paradigms for under-
standing what constitutes a trauma. I discuss trauma as a biopsychosocial/
spiritual-existential phenomenon. I also look at multiple conceptual frame-
works for understanding what might constitute a traumatic stressor and how
experiences that appear to be normative or the background noise of daily life
are potentially components of trauma. Feminist and multicultural models of
trauma will be explored as additive to the DSM-IV-TR Criterion A defini-
tion of what constitutes a traumatic stressor. One of the many critiques of
the DSM-IV-TR definition of trauma has been that it ignores the norma-
tive, quotidian aspects of trauma in the lives of many oppressed and
disempowered persons (Brown, 2004), leading psychotherapists to an inabil-
ity to grasp how a particular presentation of client distress is in fact posttrau-
matic. In chapter 4, I encourage readers to think beyond PTSD when they
conceptualize the range of posttrauma responses, with particular attention to
the ways in which various identity factors mediate how distress is experi-
enced internally and expressed interpersonally.
In Part II of this book I look at particular social locations as they inter-
sect with trauma. I examine age, gender, ethnicity, social class, sexual orien-
tation, disability, displacement, health, and spirituality as factors in the ex-
perience of and recovery from trauma exposure. Each of these social location
variables constitutes a source both of enhanced risk for exposure to trauma
for some individuals and importantly a source of enhanced resources and
resilience in the face of trauma. Each of these variables can also lend particu-
lar meanings to a trauma. I explore some of those meanings and ways to
think about how social location can lend excess negative value to a trauma.
Each of these variables can also influence how trauma is responded to, and
thus in these chapters I explore in greater depth how to think in a diverse
and complex manner diagnostically about the ways in which each survivor
18 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 24 ---
communicates about her or his distress. I also revisit the importance of look-
ing at these variables as they intersect in the life of each trauma survivor.
In Part III of this book, I discuss interpersonal and psychotherapist vari-
ables. Working with the family, friends, and communities of trauma survi-
vors is an important component of trauma therapy, but one that is frequently
neglected in the focus on trauma survivors themselves. For many trauma
survivors, these interpersonal contexts are the ones in which healing may
occur if psychotherapists notice their importance and bring them, actually or
symbolically, into the therapy room. Finally, the person of the psychothera-
pist working with trauma survivors requires attention. I discuss multicultural
considerations arising from Pearlman and Saakvitne's (1995) construct of
vicarious traumatization, with particular emphasis on how a psychotherapist's
own social locations and multiple and intersecting identities affect the expe-
rience of working with survivors of trauma. I conclude with a discussion of
future directions for deepening culturally competent trauma treatment, rais-
ing questions of where future research might be directed.
As always, my own social locations and identities form the standpoint
from which I write. A component of that standpoint is the belief that ethics
of authorship require a disclosure of those perspectives, because they create
my biases and inform my understandings. I am an upper-middle-class
Ashkenazic Jewish lesbian born in the last week of 1952, the granddaughter of
immigrants who, arriving in the United States in the early 1920s as adoles-
cents and young adults, never went beyond the seventh grade themselves but
who sent all of their children to college. I am an inheritor of a rich intellectual
tradition of critical thought; I am also an inheritor of a two-millennium-long
history of cultural trauma, the descendant of those who survived. I was trained
in the Boulder scientist-practitioner model of clinical psychology and have
been a psychotherapist in independent practice since 1979. Most of the trauma
survivors with whom I have worked have been individuals with histories of
severe, repeated trauma exposure in childhood at the hands of parents and
other caregivers, although I have also worked with persons who have survived
combat and accidents. Most of the people with whom I have worked clinically
are biologically female. In the mid 1990s I was deeply involved in the heated
debate about trauma and memory, and some of my interests and allegiances in
the field of trauma have been shaped by that experience.
As a long-time practitioner and theorist of feminist psychotherapy, I
am deeply informed by that orientation and its emphasis on the role of power
and powerlessness in the etiology of distress and dysfunction. I am also, be-
cause of that orientation, quite pragmatic about what I do in the office be-
cause I am mostly interested in the question of what helps and what works for
the person sitting across the room from me. That pragmatism is reflected in
my discussion of what works with trauma survivors and can also be seen in
my general tendency toward a transtheoretical paradigm for good trauma
treatment.
INTRODUCTION 19

--- Page 25 ---
As a psychotherapist writing a book primarily for other psychothera-
pists I do not try to provide an in-depth review of every possible scholarly
source on a topic. Rather, my interest is in inviting the reader to engage in a
virtual conversation with me through these pages about how to become aware
of opportunities for deepening cultural competence at all points in one's work
with trauma survivors. I use clinical case examples as my primary instruc-
tional strategy because my own experience as both a learner and an instruc-
tor is that ideas stay with me when flesh and blood and emotion are hung on
the bones of theory, something that I find is done best through clinical tales.
This is a book about working with adult clients. I am not skilled or experi-
enced in working with people younger than age 16. An entire separate book
deserves to be written about cultural competence in work with children and
younger adolescent trauma survivors.
The clinical case examples in this book represent, for the most part,
disguised and merged stories derived from the lives of people who have sat
across from me over the last 3 decades. Some examples also reflect and in
some instances derive from the published biographical and autobiographical
literatures on trauma and on human difference. My goal in including these
examples is to give life and breath to the dry bones of theory and to illustrate
how aspects of identity intersect, collide, and merge with the experience of
trauma.
As McFarlane (2006) recently noted, the field of trauma studies began
by attending to the literature created by trauma survivors from ancient times
to the present to bear witness to their own lives. That literature, fictional
and biographical, has been a source of knowledge for me and for the people
with whom I have worked as a psychotherapist. In a few specific instances I
have permission from a given individual to tell her or his story more fully. In
those cases the client in question has read earlier versions of my discussion of
our work together and agreed to my narrative of her or his life and the spe-
cific disguises given. However, most of the people discussed here are amal-
gams of two or more people I know. Having my clients read what I write
about them has been another important stage in my process of learning about
culturally competent trauma treatment, simply because their review of my
manuscripts prior to publication afforded them opportunities to foreground
aspects of their identities whose importance I had previously downplayed.
These individuals have been my best teachers about trauma and its mean-
ings, about what hurts, and what helps; they have also been my most power-
ful instructors about competence and resilience in the aftermath of trauma.
This book would not exist without those lessons, and although none of them
can be named, all of these people have my profound gratitude. They are the
real authors of everything written by and about trauma by the "experts."
20 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 26 ---
I
CULTURALLY COMPETENT
MODELS OF TRAUMA
TREATMENT