--- Page 1 ---
1
KNOWING DIFFERENCE
OR WE'RE ALL DIVERSE HERE
In this chapter, I explore some models for thinking about diversity and
human difference, with particular attention to how those models inform psy-
chotherapists' understanding of trauma. I also begin the process of looking
closely at what it means that each psychotherapist represents something cul-
turally meaningful to her or his clients as clients do to their psychotherapists,
and these representations affect the process and outcome of psychothera-
pists' therapeutic work.
During my time on the faculty of a doctoral program in clinical psy-
chology I took the lead in teaching a course with the well-meaning and be-
nign-sounding name "Assessment and Treatment of Diverse Populations."
When I took over the class on my arrival on campus and looked through the
syllabus prepared by the prior instructor, I was unsurprised to find that this
had been a class focused on rules for treating members of specific North
American groups of people of color and other so-called minority groups; there
was 1 week for African Americans; 1 week for Asian Americans; 1 week for
lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people; and so on.
This model, referred to in the introduction to this volume as the etic
strategy for understanding difference, has been so prevalent in psychology's
23

--- Page 2 ---
discourse about cultural competence, difference, and diversity that I would
be unsurprised if many psychotherapists picking up this book expected to
find just that approach. The epistemologies of diversity in psychology have,
until recently, been about deviance from an unspoken norm, the one in which
"even the rat was White," to use Guthrie's (1976) not-quite-humorous words
and in which a generic male human was seen to cover the experiences of all
humans, including those who, unlike males, could and frequently did men-
struate and give birth (Weisstein, 1970).
If one becomes deeply immersed in knowledge of a particular culture it
may be possible to parlay the etic model into culturally competent trauma
work in that culture alone. Psychotherapists who are intimately familiar with
the norms, customs, languages, spiritual traditions, and histories of particular
American Indian nations may be extremely well equipped to work with
American Indians from those nations as clients. Trauma has been ubiquitous
in the lives of this community, although there are large enough cultural and
historical variations from nation to nation that deeply knowing Nez Pierce
history does not mean deeply knowing Duwamish history or Dine history or
Cherokee history, despite common themes of genocide and forced reloca-
tion. But even the most culturally steeped American Indian psychotherapist
may not know what to do when the trauma for a particular client is one that
happens outside the very broad parameters of the many and common trau-
mas of this community. If, for instance, the client is a two-spirit person who
has been gay bashed by other tribal members, the psychotherapist may not
have all of the epistemic foundations necessary with which to assist the cli-
ent in recovery with that particular form of within-group oppressive trauma.
What I have found useful in making sense of human diversity and
people's multiple identities within that diversity is a model first proposed by
psychologist Pamela Hays (2001, 2007). Hays invited her readers to see them-
selves and their clients through an intersecting web of what I refer to as
"social locations" or "social identifiers." I define these as components of iden-
tity that are constructed in the context of social, interpersonal, and rela-
tional realities and that commonly inform the development of identity. Hays
developed an acronym, ADDRESSING, for her epistemic system; this stands
for age, disability (acquired and/or developmental), religion, ethnicity,
social class, sexual orientation, indigenous heritage, national origin, and
gender/sex.
Along with her acronym Hays proposed a series of strategies for devel-
oping culturally competent practice no matter whom psychotherapists are
treating. A point that she made and that seems particularly germane to work-
ing with trauma survivors is that knowing the histories of cultures and societ-
ies, not simply the histories of the individuals with whom psychotherapists
work, is a foundation of culturally competent practice. Understanding that
social locations, the places in the social network where people are interper-
sonally situated, develop within a particular historical period and are also the
24 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 3 ---
inheritors of other historical periods, allows for careful, critical examination
of psychotherapists' assumptions about each of these potential components
of identity. Many of these histories contain deeply embedded experience of
trauma that go on to be the lens through which members of these cultures
encode today's experiences. Inter- and transgenerational transmission of trau-
matic experiences cannot be well understood unless the histories that cre-
ated those experiences are part of a psychotherapist's understandings of the
world.
I often add to Hays's list, which she described as foundational but not
all inclusive, such other social locations as vocational and recreational choices,
being (or not) partnered, being (or not) a parent, attractiveness, body size
and shape, state of physical health (different from disability), phenotype (similar
to ethnicity in some instances, but not isomorphic with it), and experiences of
colonization (which frequently but not always overlap with indigenous heri-
tage in the Hays model). Readers are likely to have awareness of other social
locations that neither Hays nor I have identified, and I encourage readers to
consider including them in their understanding of themselves and their cli-
ents. ADDRESSING is useful because it invites psychotherapists to think
broadly about the locations of diverse experience in each human.
Each person, client and psychotherapist alike, will have some relation-
ship to most if not all of these social locations, and many of these locations
will form core components of identity. Bias, oppression, and stereotype can
be leveled at people on the basis of any one of these social locations; thus
each person will have either been a target of such bias, will have practiced
such a bias, and/or, as a result of being a target, will have internalized bias
into identity. If a person has not her- or himself had such experiences, the
experiences may have happened in the history of family and culture and may
have left their psychological and relational traces. The presence of bias in-
terwoven into the experience of social location in the context of social and
cultural histories informs the meanings that those locations have for people's
identities. This interweave of history, culture, trauma and identity also cre-
ates specific vulnerabilities as well as resistances to the experiences of trauma
in the present day. It is important to explore each of these factors in greater
depth and to begin the process of seeing where and how an enhanced com-
prehension of those factors can facilitate culturally competent, culturally sen-
sitive, and culturally aware trauma treatment. The discussions in this chap-
ter are introductory, and each topic explored here is addressed in great depth
later in this volume.
A BRIEF WORD ABOUT TERMINOLOGY
A preliminary word about terminology to be used here and later in this
volume to refer to groups of people who are usually referred to as minorities is
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 25

--- Page 4 ---
helpful in understanding this discussion. I have come to eschew the use of
the term minority group for a number of reasons having to do both with the
message given to people by being called minority (e.g., perhaps less than) as
well as the inaccuracy of the term (some minorities are now or are about to
become numerical majorities).
Rather, I refer to target groups and dominant groups. Target groups are
those social groups that have historically or continue currently to be targets
of discrimination, bias, oppression, and maltreatment. Dominant groups con-
stitute those social groups currently defined as the norm within a given cul-
ture. Thus, in the United States today, dominant groups include U.S.-born,
English-speaking persons of European descent who are biologically male,
heterosexual, affiliated however loosely or historically with some variety of
Protestant Christian faith, married with children, middle-class, aged 25-49,
with a college education or more, no current disabilities, not fat, normative
in their gender expression, and adhering to conventional standards of attrac-
tiveness. Target groups constitute all others. Most persons have some mix-
ture of target and dominant group status; even a person who today is entirely
in the dominant group may move out of it as a result of aging beyond 49,
acquiring a disability, losing his income and becoming poor, marrying a per-
son of a target ethnicity, or converting to a non-Christian faith, to describe
some very common trajectories for changes to social status. Movement among
and between dominant and target social locations and finding ways to share
both within one skin are other aspects of how identity develops. Understand-
ing people's dominant and target statuses can emerge through exploration
and examination of the most common categories of social location.
I also use the term social location as a broad concept that refers to a
variety of different types of experience that can affect identity. The AD-
DRESSING model, for instance, lists many of the social locations that most
commonly affect a person's sense of self as well as the ways in which others
may respond to them. Even though some social locations have a biological
component (e.g., gender, which is based in biological sex), all of them are to
some degree or another socially constructed and variable from culture to
culture. Although this terminology may be unfamiliar to some readers, my
hope is that by using it I am inviting readers to reconfigure how they think
about identity so that they eventually understand that it entails far more
than a person's current or easily visible categories in the world.
ENTERING THE ADDRESSING MODEL
To understand how the ADDRESSING model can inform a psychother-
apist's work, it is useful to explore in-depth each of the social locations iden-
tified by that model. This discussion will begin to interweave the topic of
trauma into each ADDRESSING variable.
26 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 5 ---
Age
Age is a social location with two components: one's actual age, which
speaks to issues of developmental capacities, tasks, and needs, and one's age
cohort, which informs the cultural contexts and norms surrounding one's life
experiences. One's actual age is also a risk factor for certain kinds of bias;
both children and older adults are targets of ageism, and because ageism is
internalized, persons in adolescence and young adulthood frequently are af-
fected by that internalized bias regarding their presumed future status as older
people. To practice culturally competent trauma therapies, it is essential to
understand the age (or ages, in the case of long-lasting trauma processes) at
which trauma has happened and consequently to apprehend what develop-
mental tools were available to the person for response to the trauma. The
impact of trauma on succeeding developmental processes is also understood
through the lens of age, because data suggest that traumagenic interference
with one set of tasks affects, if not entirely inhibits, the successful accom-
plishment of other later developmental tasks. A very useful decision rule
about age and severity of trauma impact is that younger persons are those
most likely to experience longest term and most pervasive consequences of
trauma exposure; this contradicts the common sense belief that the very young
are very resilient and adaptable in the face of trauma and the very old are
more vulnerable and reflects the reality that the foundational developmen-
tal tasks of childhood are more easily disrupted by trauma than are those of
later life. I return to this topic and its ramifications for trauma therapy later
in this volume.
Disability
As Olkin (1999) noted, it can be difficult to strictly define what consti-
tutes a disability. She suggested that psychologists consider two continua,
one of health and one of disability, which intersect in a variety of ways. Thus
disability refers to changes and challenges to function at the level of the body
that interfere with certain functions of life. Some conditions could disable
an individual in some circumstances but not in others. Take severe myopia,
for example. I am writing this sentence while looking through the lenses of
my glasses. I am profoundly myopic and cannot see clearly much further than
the end of my nose without those lenses; I have not been able to do so since
about age 6. Living in a society that has developed corrective lenses means
that I am not disabled from any function by my myopia, and I would
not describe it as a disability. However, for an individual living in a pre-
corrective-lens society this condition might be disabling and even life threat-
ening, because my uncorrected eyes cannot tell what is lurking just down the
road or looming beneath my feet.
Some disabilities come with few or no effects on general health. For
example, a person may be deaf as a result of the failure of the auditory nerve
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 27

--- Page 6 ---
to develop during gestation but may otherwise be in excellent health. A
person might, however, be deaf because she or he had meningitis that dam-
aged the auditory nerve and that has had various other long-lasting health
consequences. A person might be born with spastic quadriplegia due to cere-
bral palsy and have quite severe disabilities of use of language and motor
control arising from oxygen deprivation during the labor and delivery pro-
cess; health problems that emerge for this person are not inherent in her or
his condition but rather in the psychosocial consequences of having diffi-
culty with voluntary movement and relying on others to move one's body so
as to avoid decubitus sores from pressure.
Olkin (1999) has suggested looking to issues of function and the effects
of a condition on a range of functions, noting that it is useful not to think of
a "disabled person," but rather "a person disabled from" with the functions
specified by a particular condition. A person might be disabled from reading
by neurological difficulties, by visual difficulties, or by posttraumatic anxiety
but not disabled from walking, speaking, hearing, or engaging in daily self-
care functions, for example. Thus, an individual born without disabilities
may as a result of cardiovascular disease become disabled from walking or
cognitively impaired in later life. A person who suffers traumatic brain injury
after adolescence or a war veteran who experiences traumatic limb amputa-
tion in combat has acquired a condition that can be disabling. Acquiring
disability later in life can be traumagenic for some individuals.
Disability as a social location has both developmental and acquired
components. Developmental disabilities as defined by Hays (2001, 2007) are
those that develop in utero or very early in life so that they are long-lasting
and core components of an individual's experience. Acquired disabilities can
loosely be defined as those that occur or develop far enough into the life
cycle that they are experienced or perceived as a change to the person. Thus,
neuromuscular disorders that express themselves in childhood such as mus-
cular dystrophy would be developmental, whereas a similar set of symptoms
of muscular weakness arising in adulthood as the result of myasthenia gravis
would be classified as acquired.
There is an important interaction of this social location with the previ-
ous one, age. The presence of a developmental disability informs a person's
encounters with normative developmental tasks; the acquisition of a disabil-
ity later in life informs the use of formerly acquired skills and may uncover
the presence of tasks of emotional and cognitive development that were less
than adequately accomplished. Because of the impact of both medical tech-
nologies and also the legal system on the lives of people who are on the high
end of the continuum of disability, age cohort is also an extremely meaning-
ful signifier in the lives of people with disabilities.
Disability is also a social construct. One can see this in the lives of
people who identify as culturally Deaf (using the capital letter D to denote
this cultural identification). Such persons do not see themselves as having a
28 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 7 ---
disability despite the fact that the inability to hear is so defined by the larger
culture. Rather, they define themselves as an oppressed linguistic minority
who, like other oppressed groups, have been forced until recently to learn the
language of the majority culture rather than their own (Padden &. Humphries,
1988). The spirited protests held by some students and faculty during the
mid-1980s at Gallaudet University illustrate this defining process, with the
protestors insisting that this unique university of Deaf culture have a presi-
dent who was Deaf as well. Deafness is a physical condition defined as a
disability in most laws, and persons who are deaf and those who are Deaf may
request accommodations from schools and employers such as provision of
sign language interpreter services under those laws.
However, many Deaf people do not personally identify as having a dis-
ability and define themselves as occupying a cultural location that must be
defended from incursions by the larger dominant hearing world. This, too, is
a function of social factors other than the ability or not to hear; age cohort as
well as family history of deafness plays a large part in whether a person who
does not hear self-defines as having a disability. A deaf child born to and
raised by hearing parents is more likely to be defined by self and family as a
person with a disability. A deaf child born to the deaf children of deaf par-
ents, as a third generation "Deaf of Deaf (to use the term from the Deaf
community for those deaf by heritage as well as sensory capacities), is likely
to see her- or himself as a person with a different language and culture, not a
person with a disability.
I join with Olkin (1999) and Hays (2001, 2007) to suggest that cultur-
ally competent therapy with people with disabilities and their families re-
quires what Olkin refers to as a "minority" rather than a "deficit" model.
What is true is that people with disabilities have some (or several) aspects of
their bodies that function differently than those of a majority of other hu-
mans. Frequently, however, the challenges for these individuals lie not in
those physical differences but in the barriers created to fullest possible func-
tion by cultural institutions and practice. Ableism, bias against persons with
disabilities, is pervasive, and because most people with disabilities do not
come from families in which the parents are also people with disabilities,
children with developmental disabilities almost always grow up in social en-
vironments distorted by ableist bias.
Trauma enters the issue of disability in a host of ways. Because of the
risks inherent in applying a deficit versus a minority model, psychotherapists
must be careful not to assume that the presence of the disability is itself trau-
matizing or stressful. This is especially true for people whose disabilities are
developmental and for whom this way of being in their bodies is well-known
and not associated with abrupt loss or change. Harriet McBryde Johnson
(2005), an attorney, memoirist, and disabilities rights activist, exemplified
this stance in her memoir Too Late to Die Young: Nearly True Tales From a
Life (2005). Although her neuromuscular condition is progressive and has
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 29

--- Page 8 ---
increasingly disabled her from using her legs and hands as she has grown
older, her relationship with her body is one of deep familiarity. She knows
that she is a person with a disability, but that is not a source of trauma to her;
her stresses come from the barriers erected by others to her pursuit of her life.
Her story stands in contrast to those of individuals who are disabled by
events or conditions that were inherently traumatic or a source of loss: acci-
dents leading to paraplegia or quadriplegia or life-threatening illnesses such
as cancer or multiple sclerosis. Such persons, prior to loss of their able-bodied
status, may have held strong, even if not conscious, biases about the lives of
people living with disabilities, and these biases now inform their understand-
ing of the events that led to a change in function. Thus they may conflate
being a person with a disability that made its appearance in the middle of
their nondisabled life and life narrative and experience that entire change as
traumatic.
Finally, as I discuss in further detail later in this volume, being a person
with a disability can be a risk factor for some kinds of trauma exposure. The
manner in which a particular trauma attacks a person at the location of dis-
ability and those aspects of identity affected by disability will both inform
the experience of trauma. They will also shape that which may be useful in
the healing process.
Religion and Spirituality
Religion and spirituality are the next social locations in the Hays (2001,
2007) model. Even atheists have a belief system; although they may balk at
calling it a spiritual system, it will be one that allows for the making of mean-
ing. All traumatic stressors are assaults on meaning-making systems, and most
traumas will have lasting transformative impacts on the survivor's ways of
making meaning. There is a pervasive interaction between trauma and issues
of meaning making, with religion being equally a source of trauma, a loca-
tion at which trauma is directed, and a source of coping in the aftermath of
trauma.
Culturally competent practice necessitates inquiry into and compre-
hension of a survivor's religious, spiritual, and existential systems currently
and prior to and during the trauma. Changes across time arising from trauma
exposure and recovery are common, and the meanings ascribed to those
changes by a trauma survivor will often become central to understanding
some of that survivor's coping strategies in the face of trauma. It is also im-
portant for psychotherapists not to conflate religious identification with spiri-
tuality and existential meaning-making systems. Although for some people
these are isomorphic, for many others they are completely separate, as is the
case for the person who attends a Methodist church with his family on holi-
days and the occasional Sunday but describes his spirituality as being about
his relationship to nature.
30 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 9 ---
Some religious affiliations constitute target groups; which groups are
targeted depends on history and context. For example, although the Mor-
mon Church is currently a large, successful religious denomination, its found-
ing history is full of stories of hate crimes perpetrated on the founders of the
church by dominant culture Protestant Christians. In Utah today where
Mormons constitute the dominant religious and cultural group and the nu-
merical and political majority there continues to be a consciousness of target
group status in the group's early history. Similarly, an individual raised in a
cultural context in which her or his faith is dominant may develop religious
target group status when she or he moves from that context into one in which
her or his faith is no longer dominant; this is a common aspect of immigra-
tion to the United States from countries where Islam, Buddhism, or Hindu-
ism are the dominant faiths, for example. The trauma of having one's faith
marginalized can lead to distress that sometimes does not appear to be psy-
chological but represents what happens when anxiety leads to rigidification
of previously more fluid coping strategies.
Ethnicity and Culture
Ethnicity, the next factor in the Hays (2001, 2008) model, subsumes
several factors. Ethnicity is commonly used in North American discourse to
refer to persons of color, as in the phrase ethnic minorities. Hays asserts, and I
concur, that ethnicity is not the same as phenotype. Phenotype refers to
biology, the physical characteristics such as eye color and shape, hair color
and texture, skin pigmentation, and so on, which are used as place markers
for the construct of race, a concept that is then conflated with ethnicity.
Ethnicity, however, is an intersection of a multiplicity of factors that include
phenotype, culture, and language. Many Euro-American individuals are un-
aware that they have an ethnicity because they conflate that term with phe-
notype and may find a question about that topic confusing when coming
from a psychotherapist. They may answer, "I'm White. I don't have an
ethnicity." It can be helpful to give examples: One can be a "hyphenated"
American of some sort (Armenian-American, Irish-American, or Norwe-
gian-American); one can be of indigenous Euro-American ethnicity (South-
erner or Northeasterner); or as one of my students phrased it, one can be
"Heinz 57. A mutt," denoting a mixed and hybrid ethnicity of European
descent whose distal origins have been lost in transmission over time.
A person's cultural identification, ethnicity, phenotype, and ancestry
may not be isomorphic. Some fourth and fifth generation Americans of Japa-
nese and Chinese descent are disidentified with their parents' and grandpar-
ents' cultures of origin. Statistics indicate that members of these groups are
very likely to marry Euro-Americans rather than phenotypically similar per-
sons and to identify culturally with Euro-American dominant culture. "I'm a
White guy whose great-grandparents came from Japan" is the self-description
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 31

--- Page 10 ---
of an acquaintance who although phenotypically Asian appearing and with a
Japanese last name has no identification with any Asian culture, speaks no
Japanese, and describes himself as fully assimilated into the Euro-American
culture of which his spouse is a member.
Thus, ethnicity is a many faceted phenomenon containing a range of
potentially traumagenic experiences that evolve out of family history and
personal experience. Persons of non-European phenotypes and some of East-
ern or Southern European phenotypes have been the targets of racist bias
both historically and currently. Individuals who identify with ethnicities that
are primarily defined by phenotype (e.g., race) may experience exposure to
racism even when they are phenotypically more similar to the Euro-Ameri-
can dominant group. Consider, for example, Walter White, the famous Afri-
can American activist who had fair skin and hair yet clearly was targeted by
and affected by White racism.
Ethnicity has also been a source of other sorts of trauma exposures that
may be unknown to the client because assimilation was a family response to
trauma, but whose effects have been transmitted intergenerationally. Public
figures such as former Secretary of State Madeline Albright and former U.S.
Senator George Allen are two recent examples of offspring of Holocaust sur-
vivors who had no knowledge of their parents' Jewish origins until those
histories were exposed to them in their middle adulthoods. In each case the
family had used assimilation and religious conversion as self-protective strat-
egies so that dynamics related to trauma in the family's history were buried
and unavailable for understanding by either of these individuals.
Historical trauma, easier to identify in groups in which such trauma is
relatively recent, is also present in the lives of most of the large immigrant
groups who came to North America prior to the imposition of immigration
quotas. Although the potato famine of Ireland that engendered the large
immigration of Irish people to North America is 2 centuries past, the experi-
ences of colonization and conquest by the English, the banning of indig-
enous Gaelic language, the disenfranchisement of the Roman Catholic reli-
gion, and other aspects of Irish historical trauma that preceded the famine
are all components of Irish cultural identity that may be detectable in clients
of Irish descent even when, at the point she or he enters therapy, that client's
understanding of her or his ethnicity is consciously limited to her or his rela-
tionship to St. Patrick's day celebrations.
Social Class
Social class is the great invisible social location in the United States.
Although national statistics increasingly point to growing income disparities
between the richest Americans and all others and some social commentators
speak of the disappearance of the middle class due to diminished availability
of well-paying jobs outside of the learned professions, most Americans who
32 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 11 ---
are not abjectly poor are likely to describe themselves as being middle class.
Classism, the bias against poor people as well as against those who work with
their hands, is pervasive in American culture in which an analysis of class
issues has rarely been a component of the public discourse.
Social class is also a complex variable. It may or may not reflect actual
income level; some commentators on class have noted that middle-class sta-
tus reflects the presence of social capital, defined in part by such factors as
availability of literature in the home, parental or other close familial educa-
tion, and a value placed on education for its own sake, even when financial
means are absent or strained. A person of great wealth may have little or no
social capital. Additionally, in North America barriers between classes are
permeable, with social class not marked by accent, as is the case in Europe, or
hereditary participation in a landed aristocracy (although informal aristocra-
cies of wealthy visible families have long existed in the upper classes of U.S.
society and now can be seen to form through families of celebrity). A person
may live in many different social classes during her or his lifetime, with trauma
sometimes being a factor contributing to loss of class status.
Social class is conflated with several other social locations. Persons with
disabilities are more likely to be very poor, with some estimates being that
80% of people with disabilities are un- or underemployed as a result of sys-
temic barriers to participation. For instance, a person with disabilities and a
doctorate in psychology who requires multiple medications and the use of a
wheelchair for mobility and also has a personal care attendant may be unable
to find a job that both pays sufficiently to have a high quality of life and also
provides adequate health insurance coverage; she or he can only afford ac-
cess to necessary care if she or he remains on disability income payments,
which then creates needs-based eligibility for that care. If she or he does find
work that pays more than $700 monthly, she or he places all benefits in
jeopardy (Panzarino, 1994). Additionally, if this person uses paratransit ser-
vices to go to and from a job, she or he risks being terminated for repeated
tardiness because a common complaint of persons who use paratransit sys-
tems is that they are rarely on time, sometimes being as many as several
hours behind schedule. All of these factors can conspire in the life of a per-
son with a disability to leave her or him impoverished no matter what her or
his educational level, talents, or capacities. This person may thus be middle
class in values and social capital but financially poverty stricken.
Age also interacts with social class. Very young children are more
likely to live in poverty than any other group of Americans. In the past,
older age was also associated with poverty, and this continues to be the
case for many aging women and aging people of color. In those instances
earlier discrimination in the workplace created a cascading effect from lack
of financial resources earlier in life leading to reduced savings for retire-
ment and smaller Social Security payments as a result of lower paying work.
However, with the inception of so-called welfare reform in the 1990s, chil-
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 33

--- Page 12 ---
dren in the United States are more likely to be living far below the poverty
level than ever before.
Trauma interacts in a variety of ways with social class. Access to and
expectations of care and safety are enhanced for middle-, upper-middle-, and
upper-class persons. As I describe later, certain types of traumatic experi-
ences, because they are more inconsistent with the lives and expectations of
middle- and upper-class persons, are potentially more likely to be emotion-
ally challenging for these individuals. Social class also directly affects the
sorts of services and resources available to trauma survivors including insur-
ance coverage for health and psychological services. Poverty creates risks for
exposure to certain kinds of traumatic stressors including, given the all-
volunteer nature of the U.S. military, combat trauma exposure.
Sexual Orientation
Sexual orientation describes the direction and expression of an indivi-
dual's sexual and romantic desires. It is conceptualized on two continua, one
of other-sex attraction and one of same-sex attraction (realizing, of course,
that there are actually more than two sexes but that the other sexes generally
sort into malelike and femalelike categories that allow the use of this con-
tinuum paradigm for sexual orientation). Each human being is to some de-
gree high, medium, or low on each of these continua. Persons who self-iden-
tify as heterosexual are commonly higher on the other-sex attraction
continuum; persons who self-identify as lesbian or gay are commonly higher
on the same-sex attraction continuum; and self-identified bisexual indi-
viduals fall at roughly similar places on both continua. Persons' expressed
sexual behavior is commonly, although not always, indicative of their de-
sires; persons with strong same-sex and weak other-sex attraction may en-
gage in sexual and romantic relationships with members of the other sex and
not necessarily identify as lesbian or gay, for example. Not all of these rela-
tionships reflect some kind of suppression of true sexual self or self-hatred;
they can also be about a strong relational connection with one particular
other-sex individual.
Each person has a sexual orientation; for some individuals this is fixed
throughout the lifetime, as appears to be true for most gay and heterosexual
men. For others, including some lesbian and heterosexual women and some
bisexual women and men, sexual orientation is experienced as more fluid.
The best available data suggest that the origins of sexual orientation are poorly
understood for persons of all orientations but that attempts to change orien-
tation, the direction of desire, in individuals for whom this is not already to
some degree fluid are generally unsuccessful and may be harmful to those
persons. A discussion of the issue of sexual orientation conversion, or repara-
tive therapies, is beyond the scope of this chapter but is addressed as a trauma
34 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 13 ---
risk factor in greater detail when sexual orientation issues in trauma are more
fully discussed later in this book.
People who are lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) are targeted by
heterosexism (the systemic privileging of heterosexual ways of being and re-
lating) and homophobia (fear and hatred of persons believed to be LGB) and
are subject to a variety of forms of legal and attitudinal bias and discrimina-
tion. Currently most states in the United States ban marriages between mem-
bers of the same sex; although same-sex sexual behavior is no longer
criminalized in the United States, it was until quite recently. Persons who are
LGB are forbidden to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces if their sexual orienta-
tion becomes known under the infamous "Don't ask don't tell" policy. (Read-
ers might find it ironic that Israel, officially a theocracy, recognizes same-sex
marriages from other countries, which the United States does not, and allows
openly LGB people to serve in the military. Israel also makes survivor pen-
sions available to the partners of those who serve, who are also likely to have
been military veterans.) There are 17 U.S. states that have laws forbidding
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in housing, employment,
and public accommodations, but this means that the majority of states do
not have such laws. Some states, most notably Virginia, do not even allow
gay people to make nonmarital legal contracts such as medical powers of
attorney for use in emergencies regarding their domestic partnerships.
Sexual orientation interacts with all other social location variables, both
those already discussed and those to follow. Briefly, for purposes of this chap-
ter, what is important in terms of beginning to approach culturally compe-
tent trauma treatment is for psychotherapists never to assume the sexual
orientation of clients, regardless of such apparently obvious cues as the pres-
ence of an other-sex spouse or same-sex partner. Routine inquires into how a
person self-identifies are an important part of conveying to clients that a
psychotherapist is open to however they describe themselves. Psychothera-
pists who have personal difficulty with individuals of a given sexual orienta-
tion and have been unable to work through that aspect of countertransfer-
ence should refer clients to other psychotherapists, as the risk of harm to
clients from a psychotherapist's homophobia, biphobia, or negativity about
heterosexuality can be great.
An aspect of sexual orientation that is rarely considered is that of what
its practitioners refer to as kinky sex. This includes individuals who, along
with attractions to persons of a particular sex or sexes, are aroused by such
activities as bondage and discipline, the infliction or receipt of pain, various
forms of role-playing involving dominance and submission, sexual behavior
in relatively public settings known as play parties, or sex involving fetishistic
elements such as clothing of particular fabrics (leather, rubber, vinyl, and
velvet appearing to be among the most common). Sexually kinky individu-
als are gay, lesbian, bisexual, and heterosexual. Some have multiple partners
for purposes of sexual activity; some will be monogamous with one partner;
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 35

--- Page 14 ---
and still others may be polyamorous (or poly), with committed relationships
to more than one person that are not open to sexual activities with others
outside the sexual partnership.
Although there are estimates available regarding the numbers of LGB
persons in the U.S. adult population (generally ranging from 3% to 10%
depending on how these counts are made), no data exist regarding sexually
kinky individuals. Working with this group of persons requires a particular
degree of cultural competence that includes a high level of open-mindedness
about sexual activities of consenting adults. Again, as is true with a client of
any sexual orientation, psychotherapists who have poorly contained
countertransferences toward kinky sexuality should consider referring cli-
ents to other psychotherapists.
Trauma intersects with sexual orientation in a large number of ways,
and not all of these are related to a client's membership in a sexual minority.
For example, sexual assault of heterosexual women by male acquaintances
and spouses is related to the risk factor of being heterosexual and female and
thus in close relational proximity to the group of humans most likely to com-
mit sexual assaults. For LGB people, however, trauma of some sort is a con-
stant; working with LGB clients thus requires knowledge of both LGB issues
and trauma in its many guises.
Indigenous Heritage and Colonization
Indigenous heritage refers to people first known to be dwelling in a loca-
tion prior to its colonization. In the United States, this includes American
Indians, Alaska Natives and Inuits, Native Hawaiians, and Samoans (this
definition begs the question of whether these individuals were themselves
colonizers of other now-vanished groups). World-wide indigenous people
include Africans from formerly colonized countries, the indigenous dwellers
of Taiwan who were colonized first by the Han Chinese and then by the
Japanese, the Ainu of Japan, aboriginal peoples of Australia, and the Karen
and Hmong peoples of Southeast Asia. Some settings also have semi-
indigenous groups, originally European colonists who were then themselves
secondarily colonized by ultimate conquerors such as Acadians in Louisiana,
Spanish Americans and mixed-race Mexicans in the part of Spanish America
that became California, Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, all of whom expe-
rienced secondary colonization by English speakers.
What persons of indigenous heritage all have in common is a history of
colonization by a group that invaded and stole land; imposed a different lan-
guage, religion, customs, and ways of dress; often enslaved people for use in
labor to produce trade goods; and frequently committed actual genocide. To
say that trauma is an ever-present component of the lives and heritage of
indigenous peoples is a great understatement. Historical, intergenerational,
and present-day interpersonal trauma, called post-colonial trauma syndrome
36 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 15 ---
by some, are common in the lives of indigenous individuals (Duran, Duran,
Brave Heart, & Yellow Horse-Davis, 1998). Poverty is commonly associated
with indigenous status; the poorest place in the United States is the Pine
Ridge reservation, the rural ghetto of the Lakota people. But most other so-
cial location variables cut across indigenous status as well.
National Origin, Immigration, and Refugee Status
National origin reflects the issue of immigration. Except for those people
indigenous to North America, all Euro-Americans and Asian Americans and
many African Americans living here are descendants of immigrants or them-
selves immigrants (differentiated from the experiences of people of African
descent who if descended from slaves were not immigrants but rather victims
of kidnap and enslavement). Each succeeding wave of immigrants has been
greeted with hostility; the anti-Irish sign festooning New York City in the
1820s contained sentiments not unlike the anti-immigrant slogans being
preached today by the vigilante groups who troll for undocumented people
crossing the U.S. border with Mexico.
But the meaning of immigration has changed over time as well. When
my Jewish grandparents fled their native Poland in the early 1900s they knew
with certainty that they would never return, because Poland was an unsafe
place for Jews. My partner's maternal great-grandfather who hid in a ship com-
ing from Hamburg after running away from his home somewhere in the Austro-
Hungarian Empire had a similar expectation of no return, although the issue
was not as much one of safety. Immigration in the preairplane world was mostly
a permanent phenomenon that had loss embedded deeply into its fabric.
Many of today's voluntary immigrants often come to the United States
with the reasonable expectation of visiting home and extended family again
once this is financially feasible. The losses of immigration still exist for vol-
untary and legal immigrants, but their configuration is different. More like
the immigrants of the past are refugees fleeing unsafe places in their home-
lands; my dentist, a Baha'i born in Iran, cannot return home so long as the
present government, which has criminalized her faith, is in power, despite
Iran's being the place where the Baha'i faith was founded. Refugees thus
have the usual losses of the immigration experience today but are also likely
to carry with them specific experiences of trauma and danger that impelled
their departure from their homeland. Persons who are undocumented also
bear more resemblance in their experiences of immigration to those of ear-
lier generations than to legal immigrants of today in terms of danger and risk
associated with the immigration experience.
African Americans present a special experience of national origin. Per-
sons of African descent whose ancestors came to the United States before
the slave trade was banned in the early 1800s are all the descendants of those
who survived the brutal Middle Passage of the slave trade. Although many
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 37

--- Page 16 ---
also have Euro-American and American Indian ancestors as a result of sexual
assaults and intermarriages and thus can be both indigenous and immigrant
in their heritage as well, being transported to this continent in chains is a
very different migration experience even than coming voluntarily as an in-
dentured servant who shared phenotype and legal status with the master.
Similar to the experiences of these persons are modern-day people who are
trafficked into the United States and other industrialized nations for pur-
poses of low-paid work or the sex trade. Trafficked people are in essence
enslaved and come to the United States as a result of trickery or because they
have been sold to pay a family debt. The meaning of migration for these
individuals is not that of the voluntary immigrant, legal or otherwise.
Cultural competence around issues of national origin requires psycho-
therapists to consider carefully the various meanings of immigration and
migration to their own and their clients' identities and then to explore how
and where those experiences have engendered encounters with trauma. As is
becoming clear, immigration intersects with every other social location; even
persons of indigenous heritage in one place may become immigrants to an-
other place, bringing with them their particular histories of living in their
colonized countries of origin.
Gender and Sex
The final social location described by Hays (2001, 2008) is, ironically,
the one that is generally primary in people's identities—gender. Gender is
not sex. Sex is a term that describes the biological makeup of the body. As
noted earlier, persons may be one of several sexes, with external genital mor-
phology that matches or varies from chromosomal makeup or reproductive
organs. One in 2,000 live births is of a person who is intersexed, meaning
that the infant in question has genitals that are either ambiguous or inconsis-
tent with reproductive and/or chromosomal sex. Generally, however, indi-
viduals in the United States regardless of actual sex are sorted into the two
categories of male and female (the issue of intersex is addressed at greater
length later in this volume).
Gender is the social construct built on the sex of the body. It is a series
of schemata and roles that are both internalized and enacted and that begin
to be imposed on children from almost the first moment at which the sex of
a fetus is determined. Because of the very early imposition of rules regarding
appropriate gender expression, gender is frequently phenomenologically ex-
perienced as isomorphic with sex and gender expressions as hardwired in the
anatomy of the body. This position appears to be largely mythological, with
careful meta-analysis of the sex difference literature determining that effect
sizes for almost all sex differences are small and insignificant (Hyde, 2005).
Gender, no matter its origins, is quite a powerful determiner of identity
and is generally the first identity that a person experiences, usually emerging
3 8 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 17 ---
with clarity for a child between ages 18 months and 3 years. Developmental
capacities for greater and lesser flexibility of categories and less and more
critical thought about rules frequently govern the gender expression of younger
humans, particularly very young children. Younger individuals are thus quite
rigid about gender roles and rules. Gender interacts with every other social
location, because no matter what a person's social locations, that person has
a gender.
Individuals whose preferred gender expression is at variance with that
to which they have been assigned on the basis of sex are defined as transgender.
Transgender itself operates on several continua, which may or may not in-
clude the desire to surgically or hormonally modify the body to bring it into
line with gender expression. Overtly transgender individuals are frequently
mistaken for being gay or lesbian, given stereotypes of cross-gender expres-
sion in sexual minority persons; however, transgender individuals come in
the range of sexual orientations, which may or may not remain constant if
and when a person has sexual reassignment surgeries.
Cultural competence in psychotherapy requires psychotherapists to have
an awareness of their own gender schemata and the rules that they impose on
the gender expressions of others. Gender nonconformity is a frequent risk
factor for trauma exposure; however, what is less well understood is that par-
ticularly rigid forms of gender conformity also risk trauma exposure as well.
Gender expression additionally appears to mediate response to trauma expo-
sure, and posttraumatic symptoms are frequently expressed in manners re-
flecting an interaction with gendered ways of being in the world already uti-
lized by a trauma survivor.
REPRESENTATION AND PRIVILEGE
IN CULTURALLY COMPETENT PRACTICE
As noted previously, I have added several other possible social loca-
tions for consideration in the development of cultural competence for my-
self; each psychotherapist will, in deepening cultural competence, find social
locations in her- or himself and her or his clients that enhance understand-
ing of identity and its relationship to trauma. Culturally competent practice
involves the psychotherapist's awareness of her or his own personal relation-
ships to each of these variables of social location. Because of the manners in
which trauma differentially impacts each of these social locations and their
various intersections, a particular component of identity will have itself been
a source of personal trauma or distress for many persons. Psychotherapists
must also be aware that their various social locations, particularly those eas-
ily apparent to clients, will also have meanings that will color the therapy
relationship. What psychotherapists represent to their clients and what cli-
ents represent to their psychotherapists through the lenses of their collective
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 39

--- Page 18 ---
multiple identities affect therapy profoundly. The ability of psychotherapists
to be aware of those issues of representation is core to cultural competence in
practice.
The 19th century African American suffrage activist Anna Julia
Cooper said, "When and where I enter, then and there the whole race enters
with me" (quoted in Giddings, 1996, p. 13). Cooper's statement is true for
each psychotherapist and each client. When and where psychotherapists enter
the exchange of therapy, into the room with them marches their personal
and cultural histories. They will represent things to their clients and their
clients to them. This, I suggest, is more than simply issues of transference or
countertransference, because the things psychotherapists represent are fre-
quently alive and well in the social environments in which psychotherapists
and their clients live and are not simply past experiences that are symboli-
cally or unconsciously evoked or transferred into the therapeutic environ-
ment. These dynamics, even when symbolic, are not merely nonconscious
representations of personal history; they are the interpersonal and political
realities in which therapy takes place.
Culturally competent practice with trauma survivors or others requires
a heightened awareness of what it is psychotherapists represent and what is
represented to them. Culturally competent practice requires the sophisti-
cated capacity to know when the dynamic in the room is about the
psychotherapist's social locations, when it is about other representations, and
when it is within the set of more usually considered dynamics of therapy as
understood by the psychotherapist's particular theoretical orientation. This
is especially the case when one or the other person represents a component
of personal or historical trauma to the other.
A basic assumption of culturally competent practice is that psycho-
therapists can never and should not assume the trust of their clients. Trauma
is itself destructive to trust; survivors of interpersonal trauma may take years
to believe that psychotherapists will not become one of their perpetrators.
Psychotherapists working with trauma survivors represent humans who were
the source of trauma; psychotherapists' specific social locations and identi-
ties may enhance or decrease their overall role as a threat stimulus. As sev-
eral of my clients have told me, it is only because my dog, who works with
me, appeared to trust me that they then decided to accelerate their own
process and view my actions as more likely to be truly benign rather than a
trick designed to pull them closer to me so I could harm them further.
When certain kinds of difference are present, psychotherapists' clients
will have even more reasons founded in experience and reality to view their
psychotherapists with suspicion and uncertainty, not to believe that their
psychotherapists' professional training trumps their life training as biased
humans. In fact, for many members of target groups the mental health disci-
plines have been a source of pathologizing and disempowerment, making
psychotherapists less worthy of trust than some other types of healers. When
40 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 19 ---
psychotherapists represent current or historical trauma to their clients and
are aware of it, however, they increase the possibility of earning trust when
they tell the truth about their acceptance of their role as representative of
their culture. Acknowledging and validating the presence and stinky leav-
ings of historical elephants in the therapy office can communicate to clients
that psychotherapists are willing to tell truths that are uncomfortable for
them as psychotherapists and not simply to invite their clients to experience
their own discomfort. I return to this theme repeatedly throughout this vol-
ume as I explore the specific ways in which representation affects the therapy
process in trauma treatment.
Cultural competence also requires attention to the phenomenon of
dominant group privilege. Privilege is the collection of unearned advan-
tages attendant on being a member of a dominant cultural group. There are
usually corresponding undeserved disadvantages conferred on members of
target groups. Some examples of how privilege manifests itself include the
following:
• You can drive any car you want without worrying that you will
be stopped so long as you are obeying traffic laws.
• You can marry the person you love and receive survivor ben-
efits if they die first.
• You can walk into any store wearing anything you want pretty
well assured that you will not be followed or harassed.
• You believe that if you are the victim of a crime that you can
call the police and be helped by them.
• Your culture's holidays are always days off from work or school.
• You can be imperfect and few people will generalize from your
imperfections to those of everyone in your group.
• You can swear or dress in second hand clothes or not answer
letters without having people attribute these choices to the bad
morals, the poverty, or the illiteracy of your group.
• If your day, week, or year is going badly, you need not ask in
each negative episode or situation whether it has overtones of
bias or whether you're being paranoid. (Mclntosh, 1998)
Privilege lends power to one's biases; if I am a lesbian biased against
heterosexual people, I may suffer from being prejudiced but I lack the social
power to declare all marriage between other-sexed persons illegal. The het-
erosexual person biased against me has the privilege and power to legislate
against me. Acknowledging one's privilege can be a trust-engendering and
relationship-building action in therapy. Ignoring it or pretending that it does
not matter will eventually undermine trust and endanger the working alli-
ance of therapy.
When I sit across the room from persons of African descent, they can-
not know that my ancestors arrived in this country in 1919, nor does it tnat-
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 41

--- Page 20 ---
ter whether I personally benefited from slavery. What they know, and I must
also know and be able to acknowledge, is that I have benefited from the
unearned privilege associated with my phenotype of European-appearing skin
and that they, in turn, have experienced undeserved social disadvantage as-
sociated with their phenotype of darker skin than mine. I know that my
grandfather, who came off the boat in 1919 speaking no English, found work
as a carpenter in Cleveland more easily because of the color of his skin than
did a similarly experienced African American carpenter born and raised in
the city to which my grandfather came.
1 also know that when he built his home in a middle-class suburb in the
1950s no one questioned his right to be there. When the first two African
American families tried to build their homes in that same suburb in the same
time frame, their applications were held up for years by a zoning board raising
one petty question after another. A carpenter with a seventh-grade educa-
tion designed and built that first home; an architect with a master's degree in
his subject designed, built, and finally was able to live in that second home
with his daughter, who became the first African American girl in my scout
troupe but not until the city did everything it could to make him and his
family feel unwelcome. If I cannot find a way to convey to my African Ameri-
can client that I know this truth about the realities of phenotype privilege,
she or he has no reason to go past a certain point of vulnerability with me
because I will not have communicated an awareness of the power of my so-
cial location of privilege.
Other groups—heterosexual persons, middle- and upper-class persons,
those not yet disabled, and so on—also benefit from unearned privilege and,
when engaged in the intimate exchange of psychotherapy, will bring the
effects of that privilege into the dynamics of the relationship. Privilege can
protect against distress in the face of trauma, or it can be a factor leading to
distress; disadvantage can instill resilience that is protective, or it can create
vulnerabilities that spread the effects of a trauma exposure beyond their ini-
tial impact. The dynamics of power and powerlessness arising from privilege
intertwine with trauma, and when they are treated as nonexistent, they will
impinge on therapy for trauma survivors. Not yet being a survivor of trauma
is, after all, very much a form of privilege that is unearned; being able to keep
one's survivor status private and avoid the shame associated with disclosure,
something that redounds to the role of the psychotherapist within the usual
boundaries of the process, is also a form of privilege, associated as it is with
the power of the psychotherapist's role.
Privilege is not a reason for guilt on the part of the dominant group
psychotherapist. Individuals are not responsible for having inherited un-
earned privilege. I did not choose my phenotype or know the unearned
advantages it would give me. In fact, guilt from privileged persons about
their privilege invariably becomes an additional burden for the disadvan-
taged others, who then often feel compelled to do the work of reassuring
42 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 21 ---
dominant group members that they are not a bad, oppressive individuals,
and become deflected from their own agendas. Rather, psychotherapists
with some dominant group membership (and it is difficult to have none;
the heterosexual Christian married-male African American has one set of
privileges stemming from the first four social locations in his identity; I, a
lesbian Jewish cannot-get-legally-married female Euro-American have a
different set of privileges stemming from the last of my listed social loca-
tions) need to commit to personal work to become aware of their privilege
and how it manifests in their worldviews and their work to achieve and
maintain cultural competence.
A component of that work is leaving guilt and shame behind. I have
privilege; my job is to know how to live responsibly with that reality, not to
deny it or pretend that I can jettison it. Similarly, psychotherapists with
social disadvantage must become aware of the effects of internalized op-
pression and exclusion on their psyches as they enter the relationship with
clients who may have more access to privilege than they and notice how
they or their clients may subtly disempower these psychotherapists as the
dynamics of power and dominance from the larger society infiltrate the therapy
office.
As Mclntosh (1998) noted, any dominant group privilege, be it of gen-
der, sexual orientation, ethnicity, social class, and so on, is generally operat-
ing at a nonconscious level. It is the nature of privilege to make itself invis-
ible to those benefiting from it but very visible to those who do not have it.
Internalized oppression may be similarly invisible because it has become a
part of the consciousness and sense of self of the oppressed individual
(Pheterson, 1986), a negative ascription about one's own group that feels
true because it has been reinforced in oppressive social contexts for so long.
In each instance, the psychosocial impact of culturally based hierarchies will
have a residence in the therapy room and, if not brought into awareness and
consciousness by the psychotherapist, may be detrimental to an effective
healing process. Add trauma to the mixture and the potentials for problems
may increase because trauma is itself a factor disadvantaging a person and
frequently one that undermines power and privilege in ways that are confus-
ing to all parties.
This perspective can be particularly important given that psychothera-
pists frequently constitute the privileged persons in the therapy room, with
the power of the therapeutic role outweighing privilege or disadvantage that
might operate in the social world outside of therapy. Because therapy is an
elite profession requiring in most cases postgraduate study and thus the luxury
of time and financial resources and the capacities to navigate educational
systems designed by and for the privileged, few psychotherapists do not come
from dominant groups holding social privilege. When the psychotherapist is
not a trauma survivor and the client is addressing issues of trauma, then dy-
namics related to privilege will obtain even when all other aspects of social
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 43

--- Page 22 ---
location are shared by client and psychotherapist. Ultimately, privilege is
about unearned ease and the inequitable access to resources inherent in cer-
tain kinds of personal and structural power. Because trauma is about
disempowerment and the loss of safety and ease, a psychotherapist's aware-
ness of power dynamics will strengthen the work with trauma survivors no
matter what a psychotherapist's general orientation to treatment might be.
Awareness of privilege and disadvantage become important components of
knowing what one represents because the social locations that enter the room
with a psychotherapist generally carry messages about the privilege or disad-
vantage stemming from those markers of social realities.
The psychotherapist working from a culturally competent standpoint
takes the position of an ally. Allies are not advocates, nor does an alliance
stance require a deviation from the frame of one's theory of psychotherapy
(Mio & Rhoades, 2003). Rather, alliance is the stance of externalizing the
problem that has been placed on the client's shoulders and making it a col-
lective problem; specifically as relates to the issue of privilege, an alliance
perspective places the primary responsibility for responding to issues evoked
by a psychotherapist's dominant group privileges in the hands of the psycho-
therapist. It is a stance of moral nonneutrality as regards the traumatic event,
a stance that, as Ochberg (1988) pointed out long ago, is required in work
with trauma survivors for whom moral neutrality is the functional equivalent
of silently standing against the survivor. It is a stance of willingness to iden-
tify and validate the realities of systems of oppression that operate in the
lives of target group people who are also survivors of trauma (Dass-Brailford,
2006).
This can be particularly crucial when working with trauma survivors
who are a superordinate target group cutting across and through all other
identities and social locations in part because of having been the targets of a
traumatic event, rendering them members of a group stigmatized in Western
cultures. Trauma is a feminizing event; trauma renders its targets weak, help-
less, confused, and emotional, all characteristics that are associated with the
target group of femininity. Many of the meaning-making systems of our cul-
tures impute blame to the trauma survivor for what has happened; notice
that even in the case of supposedly morally neutral natural disasters a dis-
course of "why did they live there in the path of the tornado/flood/hurricane/
windstorm/earthquake fault" can be seen and heard in postdisaster public
discourse. When the psychotherapist is her- or himself a trauma survivor, she
or he is in the room not in that identity, holding the privilege of the psycho-
therapist position. As a therapeutic ally, the culturally competent trauma
psychotherapist acknowledges the presence of stigma in the room, attends to
her or his inner pulls to assume the privilege of normalcy, (which is a charac-
teristic almost always ascribed to members of the dominant group, even in
those contexts not officially dedicated, as is indeed true in the psychothera-
peutic context, to defining people as normal or abnormal), and tells the truth
44 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 23 ---
to clients about the reality of their situations rather than attempting to mini-
mize the experience of the trauma or failing to respect that the client has
already made attempts to cope with its aftermaths. The culturally competent
therapist contextualizes the experience of trauma in light of historical, sys-
temic, and institutionalized dynamics of oppression and targeting, highlight-
ing the interaction between trauma and those other phenomena in the client's
experience of pain and of recovery.
It can be helpful to differentiate clearly between privilege or its lack
and trauma. All trauma strips privilege from people; not all disadvantage is
traumatizing. Oppression, as I discuss later at length, is a risk factor for be-
coming traumatized, with some writers arguing that all oppressive systems
are inherently traumagenic. Nonetheless, oppressed people frequently also
have available to them systems of resilience and coping that mitigate the
traumagenic effects of oppression. Culturally competent therapists have the
task of enlightening themselves and their clients about the complicated in-
terrelationships between oppression, trauma, and resilience as well as be-
tween privilege, trauma, and resilience. As I discuss later in this volume,
there are times when privilege increases a person's risk of experiencing an
event as traumatic.
THE COMPETENT TRAUMA SURVIVOR
Alliance with a client and cultural competence also reflect a compe-
tency-based stance on clients (Bertolino & O'Hanlon, 2001). From this po-
sition a psychotherapist strives to see the people with whom she or he works
as having already been making numerous biological, psychological, psycho-
social, and spiritual attempts to solve the problems engendered by trauma
exposure. Gilfus (1999) referred to this stance as a "survivor-centered episte-
mology," which she defined as "first and foremost the acknowledgment of
the survivor as a complete human being with a cultural and historical con-
text, capable of expert knowledge in her or his own right, to be viewed through
the lens of a loving perception" (p. 1253).
Some of these strategies for responding to the unbearable pains of trauma
will have succeeded magnificently for varying periods of time; some will have
succeeded poorly if at all. But all of these strategies are evidence of the
survivor's intentions and desires to deal with what trauma invited into her or
his life. The Vietnam veteran nurse with whom I worked in the 1980s began
drinking to silence her nightmares and flashbacks. In alcohol she had a strat-
egy that worked very well for a decade or so, then began to break down as her
dose increased and interfered with her other life functions, and worked even
less well as even the increased dose no longer kept her intrusive symptoms at
bay (Brown, 1986). It is important to note that because active alcoholism is
more stigmatized in women than in men, her coping strategy led to more
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 45

--- Page 24 ---
social isolation and rejection from her family than similar behaviors might
have for a man. However, she was not helpless or a failure, although she
believed herself to be both when she began to work with me. She had been
actively trying to cope with her distress for almost 2 decades and was mostly
in need of a method that worked better and lasted longer so that she could
recover from the trauma and pick up the pieces of her life left by her initial
coping strategy. Just as generally culturally competent practice rests on re-
spect for the diversity of ways in which humans inhabit life and the world, so
culturally competent trauma practice respects and honors the diversity of
attempts that trauma survivors have made to solve the problems of distress
and disruption that trauma has brought into their lives.
Some coping strategies will have worked not as well as wished for or
lasted not very long. The heterosexual Euro-American man who was beaten
in the parking garage at his office and then developed an unwillingness to
leave home solved the problem of being in unsafe places by never leaving his
safe home. However, he quickly replaced the problem of unsafe places with
the problem of never being able to go to work. Because he was male in a
culture that has no official social role for a man not working outside the
home, his solution worked more poorly for him than it might have for a
similarly traumatized woman, especially if she was heterosexual and married,
two social locations that make it permissible for an adult not to work outside
the home if she is female, but stigmatize that strategy for a man.
Nonetheless, both of these people and every single trauma survivor that
psychotherapists encounter in their work will have created some sort of self-
help strategy: avoidance, dissociation, overwork, abuse of substances or food
or exercise, prayer, art, petting the dog, giving birth, or being celibate. They
have arrived at psychotherapists' offices alive, if sometimes only barely so.
Frequently the strategies that they have used reflect one or more of their
social locations, both at and after trauma exposure; some of their strategies
will have been learned from other people residing in a shared traumatized
context, be it familial or cultural. Some of the reasons that they will have
come into therapy also reflect their social locations and the capacities of
their emotional and psychosocial environments to support their strategies or
not. A stance of alliance is one that recognizes psychotherapists' client's de-
sires to problem solve buried in what are now symptoms of distress and dys-
function and honors that problem-solving capacity in an overt and respect-
ful manner as a component of the therapy process. Similar to Rogers's (1957)
thesis that all humans are possessed of the drive to self-actualize, so I find
useful the notion that humans have the will to solve the problems of their
lives. As I discuss later, a component of culturally competent treatment for
trauma involves exploring effective strategies developed not only by psycho-
therapists but by other similar survivors who are often the best experts on
what works.
46 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY

--- Page 25 ---
In summary, cultural competence in work with trauma involves two
sets of knowledge and two sets of emotional skills that must then be skillfully
combined into one set of strategies for understanding and interacting with
those who seek psychotherapists' care. In the remainder of this volume I
explore further how to think about diverse experiences and their relation-
ship to trauma so as to deepen that combined set of skills in clinical practice.
KNOWING DIFFERENCE 47