--- Page 1 ---
Also from Celia Jaes Falicov

| LATINO FAMILIES
vay Trasion | IN THERAPY

Continuity and Change over the Life Cycle
Celia Jaes Falicov, Editor

SECOND EDITION

CELIA JAES FALICOV

Sp

| THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

soacceseemnenentemie


--- Page 2 ---
CHAPTER 10
The Persistence of Extended Kin

Feeling rich when they enjoy a joke with friends and family
at their sides,

—JIMMy SANTIAGO Baca, describing many ignominies
suffered by Mexican migrant workers (2009, p. 72)!

Entre los parientes y el sol, cudinto mas lejos mejor.

Just as it is best to keep distance from the sun, so it is the
case with one’s relatives.

—MEXICAN PROVERB (my translation)

Lz ethnic narratives invariably emphasize family in terms of

inclusiveness and interdependence. In family systems terms, family
connectedness—the obligation to care and support one another—is a defin-
ing feature of extended family life. This cultural tendency toward family
connectedness seems to withstand migration and persist in some form for
at least one or two or more generations. It has become an almost uncon-
tested truism among social scientists and practitioners to assert that the
basic social and emotional unit of Latino culture is the extended family,
although in reality there are national, regional, and personal variations
to this widespread phenomenon. It can also be a somewhat less consistent
feature in second-generation adults, and of course, there is always the
individual family history that defies the stereotype.

The physical and psychological presence of extended family is a
common theme in many novels written by Latin Americans and Latinos
in the U.S. Latino young authors often write about their own extended
family life and the powerful impact the various members have had on
their growing up. Descriptions of the traditional arrangements stress la
gran familia, a large group that comprises three or four generations of

285


--- Page 3 ---
286 FAMILY ORGANIZATION
relatives, including vertical relationships of parents, grandparents, uncles,
and great aunts as well as horizontal relationships between adult siblings,
cousins, and myriad others. This large, interconnected group places co;
siderable value on the day-to-day, or at least weekly, interactions of jts
members. In an idealized version, there is a buzzy, noisy, chatty atm
sphere in small spaces. Many people are part of a family’s daily life, and a
grandparent, an uncle, an aunt, or a godparent can always be counted on
to change a diaper, keep an eye on a toddler, or monitor an adolescent’s
high jinks in the neighborhood. Overwhelmed parents get a much-needed
break, and their children find some individual attention as this or that.
relative lends a hand.

The line in a poem by Jimmy Santiago Baca (2009) at the beginnin,
of this chapter reflects the great comfort and even a sense of affluence
that comes from socializing with family and friends for impoverished
immigrants who lack other sources of support and entertainment. Several
concepts of connectedness underlie descriptions of family organization, —

FAMILISMO OR FAMILY INTERDEPENDENCE

Familismo is a concept has been used repeatedly for decades to charac-
terize Latino cultural preferences about family organization (Keefe et.
al., 1978). It connotes a commitment to inclusiveness, participation, and
strong relationships in nuclear and extended family networks. Visits are
frequent and helpful exchanges commonplace. Boundaries around the
Latino nuclear family are flexible, expanding to include grandparents,
uncles, aunts, or cousins with natural ease. Children who are orphaned
or whose parents are divorced or have left for the U.S. may be included in
the household of relatives, along with adults who have remained single or
become widowed. Both vertical and lateral kinship ties, up to third and
fourth cousins, are often close.

Familismo also suggests the attribute of collectivism or interdepen-
dence. Many family functions are shared, such as caretaking and control
of children, financial responsibility, companionship, emotional support,
and problem solving. Families emphasize collective rather than individual
ownership or obligation, and affiliation and cooperation rather than con-
frontation and competition. It is the dominant culture-specific concept
used among researchers and clinicians studying and treating Latinos,
although some researchers have raised the issue as to whether indeed it is
a unique characteristic of Latinos or it is shared by many other cultural
groups, including whites (Schwartz, 2007). This, of course, makes sense
based on the assumption that all human beings need both autonomy and
connectedness, in different ways at various times in the life cycle. Cultural

The Persistence of Extended Kin 287

_ variations may be a matter of degree and types of interpersonal involve-

ment. Thus, it may be best to move away from dichotomies of individual-
ism versus collectivism, since these are both human needs that exist in
variable forms and at variable times in the life of a person and a family.
Clinicians need to be mindful of making pan-ethnic generalizations
about Latinos and instead increase the complexity of their approach via
awareness that different Latino groups and different generations may
have different degrees and definitions of familismo (Baca-Zinn & Wells,
2000). For example, high rates of marriage and two-parent families,
which are often thought to be components of familism, apply more to
Mexicans and Cubans than to Puerto Ricans or Dominicans and more to

_ first- than to second-generation Latinos (Cherlin, 2010), who also tend to

have smaller families (see Chapter 2).

It is useful for practitioners to explore with families their degree of
familismo by inquiring about its components: proximity to kin, contact
with kin, and degree of kin support (Sarkisian et al., 2006). Studies find
that Mexicans tend to reside with family or live near kin more frequently
than Puerto Ricans and other Latinos or whites, Mexicans have more
face-to-face contact and contact by phone or letter than whites. Family
researchers focus on three types of kin support: emotional or affective
support, financial support, and instrumental or practical support. Lati-
nas appear to be more likely than white women to receive child care from
relatives, and this is thought to serve both instrumental and emotional
purposes.

Culture or Socioeconomic Class?

Does the prevalence of familism lie in the culture or in socioeconomic
need? Some recent research stresses the impact of socioeconomic need
over culture as an explanation for extended family reliance (Sarkisian
et al., 2006). This is a compelling and most likely accurate finding, but it
seems possible that it is a both-and situation whereby culture and class
together intensify the pattern, since an emphasis on family cohesion
exists even when no economic needs are pressing. It is possible that the
size of families, developed under the influence of Roman Catholic values,
contributes to a lifestyle of family interconnectedness and mutual help.

Family Size or Familismo?

Little attention has been paid to comparisons of family life in small and

4 large family systems. Among Latino groups, descriptions of familismo
_ are most prevalent among Mexicans, who also have the largest number

of children. It would seem fruitful to consider that the sheer size of the


--- Page 4 ---
288 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 289

household changes the texture of family life. As systems, small families The Role of Family Rituals
operate differently from large families. In a classic study of 100 large
families, James H. Bossard (1956) found many unique characteristics in
child rearing, personal interactions among siblings, and individual feel-
ings of security. Perhaps because of the historical context of that study,
when American families were becoming smaller, many aspects of large
families were described as vulnerabilities, but nonetheless the argument
about the need to understand different systems according to their size is _
a compelling one. . S

The culture of a large or a small family organization shapes many
values in the domain of parenting and child rearing. These values relate
to issues of individual attention and control, the nature of sibling relation.
ships, the emphasis on romantic or parental aspects of a couple’s life, and.
a perspective on family problems as maximized or minimized. A sum: :
mary of differences appears in Table 10.1.

A look at the column for small families quickly reveals how much of _
what is learned as normative and valued as desirable by the helping pro-
fessions in the U.S. is based on a small family ideal, and how easy it would —
be to attribute negative evaluations to the workings of large families. Thi
is an area where theoreticians, researchers, and practitioners could ben-
efit from clarifying what is likely to be expected as elements of daily fam-
ily life in small and large family systems and avoid imposing the preferred”
standards or ideologies of one system over another. Most importantly, it
seems likely that large family systems have different resiliencies, risks, and
vulnerabilities than small ones. Knowing more about these would help
the work of multicultural practitioners.

Nowhere is familismo better reflected, and reinforced, than in family
rituals—a key component of family life for many Latino groups. Rituals
are often extended family celebrations that proclaim and reaffirm unity
and connection. They may mark special events or occasions, but they also
have a place in daily life. Not one week may go by without one or both
extended families requesting the presence of all nuclear family members
for some type of gathering. The most common ritual for many families
is la comida semanal (the weekly meal) at each of the two grandparents’
households, which usually takes place on weekends. This weekly custom
includes all the unmarried or married offspring with spouses, children,
and drop-in relatives of all ages. Visitors of any of the regular members
may also be present.

Middle- and upper-class families from Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba,
and South America often continue some form of these gatherings in the
U.S., in part because they have the space, the household help, and the eco-
nomic means. But most immigrant families are poor and have shrunken
_ extended networks. Still, informal rituals may persist or emerge—a family
picnic in a city park, or a get-together for no other reason than to share
a simple meal.

As a great believer in the weekly shared meal and its importance for
family connection and identity, I often ask immigrant clients if they might
create a modified version of la comida semanal, perhaps eating together
after church on Sunday or going for an ice cream after the children’s
soccer game. A weekly family meal may involve parents and adolescent
children in cooking and cleaning, and this ritual in turn may renew the
tradition of inviting significant others, if only to share a pizza and eat

TABLE 10.1. Family Size and Family Culture roup style. Whatever their form, these gatherings symbolize familismo—

Small families Large families solidarity, pride, loyalty, and a sense of belonging and obligation to one’s
Parenthood Intensive Extensive amily ties.
Individual attention High Limited :
. a The Familial Self
Control Democratic Authoritarian
e ost clinicians are trained to stress values of autonomy and indepen-
i Exclusion Inclusion 5 prare 5 : z
FERRO: xem - dence and may wonder how the individual functions in such a collective
Values Individualism Golecuvisnt orld. First, it is important to recognize that striving toward autonomy
see agente ind independence are human needs that Latinos and other collectivistic
eparal ‘oups share. The term familial self may also explain how Latino individu-
Couple Romantic Parental als participate in life among many.
Siblings Small/peripheral Large/central Psychoanalyst Alan Roland (1988), in observing Japanese and Indian
8 | 5 i ined! People, coined the term. familial self to describe a sense of self that includes
Problems Magnified Nanumize one’s close relationships as part of who one is in collectivistic-oriented


--- Page 5 ---
290 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

cultures. This self-family construction is useful in understanding Latinos’
dedication to children, parents, family unity, and family honor. Money,
objects, home, and other possessions are shared easily, perhaps because
a familial self is tied to a different conception about individual rights and
property (Falicov, 2001). The familial self is balanced by an inner reserve
of unshared feelings, which Roland calls a private self, behind which all
kinds of secret feelings and fantasies are kept. This inner separateness
may explain in part how Latinos can individuate from their parents’ nur-
turance and control, while maintaining considerable emotional closeness
and mutual dependency for a lifetime.

Closeness Pathologized

Familismo and the familial self construct extend our understanding of —
Latinos’ preference for close connections with family. They also serve as
important comparisons to mainstream European American ideas about
family life, and as such, help practitioners avoid applying diagnostic labels
(e.g., enmeshment) that do not fit. Indeed, what constitutes “excessive” con-
nectedness in one culture may have entirely different meanings in another. _

While European American practitioners may be at risk for patholo- _
gizing Latino closeness, they may also incorrectly label the behaviors that
characterize such close family connections. For example, gender social-
ization motivates women to be supportive of their children and their hus-
bands and to “sacrifice” themselves in silent ways that may be alien to
European American culture. In mainstream American psychotherapy,
this can be mistaken for codependence.

Inclan and Hernandez (1993), two Puerto Rican psychologists work-
ing in New York, wrote an interesting and useful cultural critique of cod
pendence, the construct so widely used as the basis for self-help and treat:
ment approaches to chemical dependency. Inclan and Hernandez argue
that the concept of codependence is embedded in values of separation=
individuation and individualism. Clearly the notion of codependence —
needs critical review before application to Latinos because the changes _
these “codependent” clients are expected to make amount to a rejection
of familismo. The pervasive value of familismo emphasizes the duties of
family members to help one another always, but even more so in the face
of serious problems such as alcohol or drug addiction.

Poverty and family honor also play a role in intensifying the bond
of familismo, because they promote even stronger family ties as a sl
vival safety net. Further, family honor dictates shielding family conflict,
shame, or deviation from external scrutiny, particularly for immigrants
who already fear prejudice. Professionals’ misunderstanding of these
Latino preferences can result in their labeling familismo as pathological

The Persistence of Extended Kin 291

codependency or enmeshment, even more so for those belonging to
the second generation, since they are expected to be more acculturated
than the first. Nevertheless, situations arise when family protectiveness is
excessive or counterproductive.

THE CAST OF CHARACTERS AND IMPLICATIONS
FOR PRACTICE

Understanding the unique brand of connectedness that characterizes
many large family networks helps us “read” and compare MECAmaps of
family organization. Crucial to this exploration is to identify the players
and their specific roles and relationships. In this section I explore cultural
meanings about extended family members such as grandparents, non-
kin “family members,” godparents, the authority of parents, the devotion
between mother and son, and the lifelong bond among siblings, both in
situations of their physical or their psychological presence. In the concep-
tual descriptions below, I include implications for clinical practice related
to the various aspects of family organization.

The Physical Presence of Extended Family:
Questioning Myths

From a family systems viewpoint, a large and stable collectivistic group
generates complexity, emotional attachments, options for fulfilling
instrumental and expressive functions, and alternatives for resolving
problems and modeling behaviors. In extended family settings, multiple
caretakers may create various forms of primary attachments, so processes
of separation-individuation and marital differentiation may evolve dif-
ferently and require other parameters of analyses than those applied to
small nuclear families. As we attempt to understand the role of physically
present, extended family members in immigrant families, we have few
guidelines that address the complexities of these family arrangements.

When extended family members are physically present, they may
play a significant role in shoring up the family as it struggles for continu-
ity and copes with change. Their sense of familism drives a concern for
one another's lives, a pulling together to weather crises, a sociocentric
child rearing that makes children care about others around them, the
pooling of money and resources, and the keeping of adult children at
home until marriage and even after. These behaviors are a measure of
relational resilience (Walsh, 2006).

The presence of extended family members or even familism does not,
however, guarantee that all is well for the immigrant family. The concept


--- Page 6 ---
292 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 293
such as a grandmother who functions as mother, but also non-kin or “fic-
ive kin” members who have been anointed as family, such as godparents
r friends of the family (see Chapter 1 for assessment tools).

of family closeness is sometimes brought to such idealized “heights” ¢]
stereotypical pictures of cozy family life reign, and the tensions and dis
connections among extended family members are discounted or ignored
Indeed, not everything is good in extended families, and nobody knows ;
better than the people who live in them. Like the Mexican saying quote
at the beginning of this chapter, “Entre los parientes y el sol, cuanto mds lej
mejor” (Just like it is best to keep distance from the sun, so it is the cas.
with one’s relatives). :

The presence of extended family may ensure a protective conte:
of language, customs, money lending and more, but it does not ensur
a conflict-free family environment or even predict traditionalism in a)
areas of life. Large families generate different problems than small fami
lies. For example, triangles involving husband, wife, and mother-in-la
or involving mother, grandmother, and child may be more common i
three-generational settings than in two-generational arrangement
Closely tied, richly joined networks may generate their own problemati
patterns, such as same-generation alliances and triangles, which need t
be considered both culturally and contextually.

he Presence of Grandparents

any Latino children have the reassuring presence of a grandparent
ound, a fact that is related to conditions of poverty and a tendency
oward inclusivity and trigenerational arrangements. A grandparent
ight intercede in favor of the child against the parent or might provide
shelter for the child. Grandmothers can provide the influential knowl-
dge embedded in the language, the foods, the customs, the religion,
and traditional practices about childbearing and child rearing (Garcia
‘oll et al., 1996). These influential transfers of knowledge may buffer a
‘family from some of the effects of urban poverty and acculturative stress
n daily life. In situations of physical abuse, grandparents can become
dvocates for the child, whether openly or covertly, making a significant
ifference in the abused child’s life and helping break a legacy of violence
_ for the next generation (see Chapter 12).

Transnational parents are primarily dependent on the grandmother
_ (or another female relative) who remains in the home country and takes
over the parenting role. A grandmother may often feel stressed with
responsibilities of taking care of the children of several of her children,
earning a living, and care taking of her aging parents or other unattached
family adults who all live at home. Chapters 1 and 4 contain several case
arratives in which the presence of the grandmother during pre- and
postmigration is essential to survival.

Many Latino children call their mothers and grandmothers by
closely similar names, such as Mami and Mamita. A definition of Mama
(or Mom) that is inclusive of grandmothers and sometimes of aunts is
pervasive in Latin American cultures. In Chapter 4 we talked about the
concept of “other mother.” A recent children’s poetry book, titled Love to
Mama: A Tribute to Mothers (Mora, 2001), contains as many poems about
grandmothers as it does about mothers and aunts. The author, a Latina,
dedicates the book to “all who mother us.” Of course, there is also the
grandmother who defies the generalization of benevolence.

PRACTICE IDEA: CONSIDERING THE MEANING OF TRIANGLES
IN CULTURAL CONTEXT

In two articles, I (Falicov & Brudner-White, 1983; Falicov, 1998) under
take a critical analysis of the cultural- and contextual-bound nature of
the triangulation construct. Family therapists often regard triangles as.
automatically indicating problematic interactions in families, without
consideration of the various meanings and configurations of triangles in
settings other than the two-generation family unit.

Kith and Kin

The nuclear family models most therapists use are too narrow for applica-
tion to many Latinos, so we must think beyond their confines. It is impor-
tant to ask if other people live with the family that came for treatment or
how present are absent family members.

PRACTICE IDEA: DRAWING MULTIGENERATIONAL GENOGRAMS PRACTICE IDEA: INVITING EXTENDED FAMILY MEMBERS TO SESSIONS
Clinicians must avail themselves of these natural aids (and aides) in

Family therapists need to become adept at drawing multigenerational
the large family system by inviting grandparents and aunts, uncles and

genograms that include not only kin members outside the nuclear unit, —


--- Page 7 ---
294 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

godparents to the family or individual sessions and by connecting via
transnational technologies because engaging their participation can facil.
itate parental or child change.

Other People in the Household

For new immigrants and low-income Latinos, it is not uncommon to have
seven or eight people sharing a room, and several people sleeping in one
double bed. The family will likely reveal the important “others” as the bar-
riers of institutional mistrust melt away.

After a few sessions, a family consisting of mother, father, and three chil-
dren began talking about “the other family.” In their rented apartment they
were housing another family of four who had recently arrived from a town
near their native home in Oaxaca, Mexico. The “new” family was paying
to rent one of the two bedrooms. Both families shared one bathroom and
kitchen. Although it helped pay the rent, the arrangement was creating seri-
ous tensions and jealousies, rather than the anticipated help and child care,

and may have aggravated marital problems and fighting among the chil-
dren.

Another family, from Ensenada, Baja California, Mexico, consisted of a
mother, three grown daughters, and a well-to-do father who apparently lived
with them on and off and paid for their therapy. But this was a different type
of family arrangement: This was the father’s “on-the-side” family, his casa
chica. He had another legal family of wife and five grown children, his casa
grande. He was reluctant to participate in the therapy with his second family,
because he was going with his (legal) first family to therapy somewhere else
and that therapist had prohibited him from seeing his second family while
he was solving problems with the first. The other therapist had quickly pro-
moted an acculturative stance, wanting the father to conform to European
American monogamy with his “first” family, not considering the possible dis-
service to his “second” family and to his attachment to them.

It is not uncommon for men or women who migrated without their
families to live in groups and take on newcomers as a gesture of help,
often with good outcomes such as the new person being a good cook or
cleaner. But at other times, the open-door policy can prove costly, such as
when the newcomer leaves abruptly a few days later, robbing all tenants of
their radios, watches, money, and clothing.

The Persistence of Extended Kin 295
PRACTICE IDEA: BEING CURIOUS AND OPEN ABOUT FAMILY ORGANIZATION

Rather than taking an acculturative stance, it is best to politely ask ques-
tions about who is included in the family setting and give each family
member an opportunity to voice his or her feelings and opinions: “Is this
type of family composition common in your country? Among your family
and friends? How does it work? What tensions does it produce, if any?”

The Presence of Service Personnel

Itis common both in Latin America and in the U.S. for Latinos to hire
the services of maids, nannies, and gardeners. Although these practices
vary with socioeconomic level, it is common even among working women
ofhumble means to rely on the services of a housekeeper or babysitter to

help raise children or clean house, sometimes in an exchange-for-services
mode.

A family who asked for a consultation consisted of a single, professional
Puerto Rican mother and her two teenage daughters, whom she had raised
“alone” since they were babies. Then I learned that Lupita, maid, cook, baby-
sitter, and “jill’-of-all-trades, had lived with the three of them and slept with
the girls for the past 10 years. Lupita had just now brought her 12-year-old son
from El Salvador to join this family. When Lupita came at my request for an
information session, not only did she know much more about the girls than
the mother, but she also turned out to be the best cotherapist I'd ever had,
and the mother’s most sensitive coach. In a similar situation, a husband and
wile, both white professionals, agreed to include in family sessions their maid
who was helping them raise their three adopted children.

Maids have both a silent presence and a great impact in the lives of
children and adults in Latino families, and they should be considered part
ofthe extended family network. Denise Chavez, the vibrant, uplifting Chi-
cana writer, devotes sections of her 1994 novel Face of an Angel to what she
calls “The Book of Services.” There she sings the praise of some of those
unsung Latino heroes: the maids, gardeners, and waitresses. In a book
titled Doméstica, the sociologist Pierette Hondagnue-Sotelo (2007) high-
lights the voices and experiences of immigrant workers from Mexico and
Central America, cleaning and caring for children in affluent households.
The author also includes the outlook of the women who employ them in
Los Angeles. I owe one of these women the gift of a secure attachment.


--- Page 8 ---
296 FAMILY ORGANIZATION
Nelly was an illiterate, indigent, 18-year-old Argentine indigenous youn;
woman who came from the northeast provinces down to Buenos Aires as a
live-in maid to work for my family when I was a 9-month-old baby because.
my mother had become pregnant again. She quietly vanished from my life 19
years later, just prior to my wedding, when she was “no longer required” i,
my parents’ household. Although she never told me, I always suspected th;
she had wanted to leave much earlier, but must have known that I so ver
much needed her warm and comforting presence in my life. That she coul
not continue to be part of the family when she ceased to be wna empleada (an
employee) represents another excruciating social injustice toward “service”
people. I later learned that she had a baby girl and had named her Celia Be
triz, my first name and my sister’s first name.

PRACTICE IDEA: EXPLORING INVOLVEMENT OF EXTENDED FAMILY
IN PRESENTING ISSUE

The involvement of extended family and nonfamily helpers or friends_
with the nuclear family should always be explored. To what degree are
these other players part of the difficulties or part of the solution? Would
therapy with the nuclear family benefit from the participation of others?
A simple question such as “Does anybody else live with you?” or “Who
helps you with the children when you're working?” begins this explora-
tion. I invite domestic workers and nannies to join sessions and have _
found parents to be open to this inclusion. These adults often have more
intimate knowledge of the children’s lives and have specific praise and
specific complaints about how the children behave toward them and oth-
ers. They are often a source of very helpful ideas on how to solve problems —
that they have not dared, or have not been asked, to express before. The

emotional attachment between these helpers and children, and occasion-
ally between the adults, is often significant. However, these attachments
and resources will remain undetected unless the practitioner inquiries
about them.

The Presence of /a Tia or el Tio and los Primos
(Aunts, Uncles, and Cousins)

Unmarried Latino men and women may live in the home of married_
siblings for many reasons: for economic benefits, or to provide help, or _
because they are recently arrived or divorced, or because the parent for
whom they were caring has died. The presence of a maternal or paternal _
aunt is so common among my client families that I have come to label it /a

The Persistence of Extended Kin 297

wa (the aunt). The therapist usually discovers the importance of Ja tia ser-

_ endipitously, similarly to the other-family pattern mentioned previously.

In some cases, the aunt serves useful affective and instrumental functions
while subsystem boundaries are maintained. In other cases, depending
on her age and role interactions within the family, the aunt may form a

_ cross-generational coalition with a parent or child, or may attempt to act
_ as an intermediary between the two, sometimes benefiting growth, but
_ other times blocking it, as in the following example.

~ Charito Pérez, an unmarried 33-year-old woman, moved in with her brother,

his wife, and their children. She quickly formed a coalition with Maria, her
14-year-old niece, against Maria’s father, her brother. Marfa claimed that her

_ Aunt Charito understood young people much better than her father, espe-

cially in areas of fashion, curfew, and friends. There was some truth to this,
in that the aunt had recently arrived from Cuba with “more advanced” ideas
than Mr. Pérez, who had migrated 20 years before and held to traditional

_ ways, especially with regard to his expectations of women. The aunt’s role

as mediator was a resource at times, but her protective stance sometimes
prevented Mr. and Mrs. Pérez from reaching agreements directly with their
daughter. In addition, this coalition also inflamed the covert conflict between
Charito and Mr, Pérez, who exerted his control as older brother rather sternly.

PRACTICE IDEA: DETERMINING WHETHER EXTENDED MEMBERS
ARE A HINDRANCE OR A HELP

In these situations, the clinician needs to be careful not to conceptualize
automatically the presence of the unmarried “stranger” in the family as a
problem or as a help. Nor should the practitioner believe that a triangle
always reflects underlying marital conflict, as there are many types of tri-
angles in large families. Benevolent triangulations could provide a cultur-
ally congruent, indirect avenue for productive communications (Falicov,
1998).

Relationships with peers, and particularly same-sex peers—whether
siblings, cousins. or friends—are so important for Latinos that it’s not
unusual for them to be implicated in the presenting problem of an indi-
vidual or family. In Chapter 7 we discussed how in Verénica’s case, a
high degree of stress could be understood as part of a peer triangle that
involved her older cousin’s attempts to seduce her boyfriend. Family peer
relationships can be a source of support and fun, but they may also be


--- Page 9 ---
298 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

openly conflicted or comprise a stressor that affects the individual clien,
or family.

Godparents: Comadres and Compadres

In European American culture, godparents typically play an honora,

role in family life. In Latino culture, godparents may be vital participants —

with significant status in families. The Latino custom of compadrazgo
establishes two sets of extended family relationships: one between pad,

nos y ahijados (godparents and their godchildren); the other between the
parents and the godparents, who become comadres and compadres (c

parents). Many Mexicans and Mexican Americans live in the same towns.

as their comadres and compadres and use their help ina variety of ways. God-
parents are equivalent to an additional set of parents who have acquired
formal kinship through a religious ceremony. They may act as guardians
or sponsors of the godchild and care for him or her in emergencies, and
they may be chosen from among members of the extended family or from
outside. Godparents perform different roles and functions at various life-
cycle transitions and rituals, such as baptisms, communions, weddings
and funerals (see Chapter 12). =

PRACTICE IDEA: EXPLORING THE RESOURCE OF GODPARENTS AND OTHER
RELATIVES AND FRIENDS

In many instances, migration separates the child and the family from the
godparents. But near or far, godparents can have transnational auxiliary
functions as advocates for the child, adolescent, or even for the pare:
They can provide temporary relief for a sick or stressed parent or become

an intermediary between parents and children. They can be especially _
valuable resources when therapy is addressing life-cycle impasses. In the _
case of an out-of-control adolescent, a godmother provided a “demilita-
rized zone” in her home so the parents and adolescent could begin to deal _

with their conflicts. Given their relative formality and emotional distance,

godparents are often more effective with unruly adolescents than the bio- _
logical parents and even the grandparents, who sometimes are too partial _

toward the child.

Whether working with individuals, couples, or other groupings, prac-
titioners are challenged to expand their unit of observation beyond the
nuclear unit, while keeping in mind that extended family relationships
may be part of the problem or part of the solution. Although relatives and
godparents are seldom mentioned by families, practitioners might find a
valuable resource if they take the initiative to ask about abuelos, tios, tias,

The Persistence of Extended Kin 299

primos comadres and compadres. Clinicians must avail themselves of these
patural aids in the large family system, by inviting grandparents or aunts,
uncles, and godparents to family or individual sessions.

The Psychological Presence of Extended Family:
Virtual Connections

For transnational families, familismo may be manifest in the persistence

of long-distance attachments and loyalties. These loyalties are manifested
in multiple ways, from the commitment to communicate at long distance
to efforts at reunification. The family members and the ideologies of
these richly joined systems make their presence felt at a psychological
level. Migration may exacerbate family problems that already existed, and
these tensions may continue at long distance because families remain con-
nected psychologically, and often virtually.

When extended family is far away, la familia may become the emo-
tional container that holds both future dreams not yet realized and lost
meanings that are no longer recoverable. At its most concrete, immi-
grants send remittances back home in exchange for collective caretaking
of remaining family members (children, elders), thus reinforcing a tra-
ditional system of emotional and economic interdependence. At a more

- abstract level, the idea itself of a three-generational family can trigger

other large existential meanings, such as one’s lost national identity. A
study of young adults (Troya & Rosenberg, 1999) who had migrated to
Mexico as children of parents who were seeking political refuge from
Chile and Argentina demonstrates the powerful psychological presence
of absent relatives. When asked for their spontaneous images in response
to the word patria (fatherland) or tierra (land), they answered with the

_ street or house where the grandmother or the aunt lived, reflecting or
_ perhaps creating anew deep intergenerational bonds between country

and family—a psychological familism. Chapter 5 explored how members
of the second generation do not necessarily abandon internally the con-
nectedness of extended family systems even as they acquire language and
other external adaptation skills of the mainstream.

PRACTICE IDEA: ASKING ABOUT THOSE LEFT BEHIND

As we saw in Chapter 3, when constructing a migration narrative, it is
important for practitioners to ask about those left behind. Their psycho-
logical presence can be a source of comfort and narrative coherence in
a client’s life, and it can also be a source of conflict, preoccupation, or
sadness that is tied to the presenting issues or to the possible solutions.


--- Page 10 ---
300 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

HIERARCHIES IN NUCLEAR
AND EXTENDED SETTINGS

The Authority of Parents

Despite the presence of godparents, aunts, uncles, maids, and other pla)
ers in the life of a Latino family, parents clearly have top billing, even it
situations when separated children are raised by other family membe
as we have seen in Chapter 4. Although parents certainly care for thei
children, closeness does not necessarily mean permeable boundaries, or
even a great deal of self-disclosure, because too much closeness could
threaten another strong organizing value: parental authority. Rules org
nized around age are the most important determinants of authority, wit
older men and women granted the greatest leadership and influence.
Latino parents command the respeto (respect) of children. For many
Mexicans, Nicaraguans, Costa Ricans, Salvadorans, Guatemalans, etc :
respeto means a relationship involving filial dutifulness within a hierar
chical framework. For example, a 40-year-old Cuban woman considered _
it a sin to be disrespectful by not responding in a timely way to parent
needs for contact, involvement, and financial support, the way she per-
ceived her European American husband failing to respond to his parents.
The authority of parents may persist throughout life, attenuated for adult
children. Compare this situation with the European American concept
of “personal authority” (Williamson, 1981), which underlines autonomy
from parental approval as the hallmark of optimal adult development.

The Status and Sacrifice of Mothers

Gertain cultural prescriptions pertaining to gender also bolster parental
status. The idealized role of the mother has been equated with self-denial
and abnegation. When her patience is exhausted, a mother may become
upset, nervous, or quietly suffer, but she is not expected to take time off
or demand collective cooperation. A clinician may see the need to encour _
age a client toward great self-investment in personal care for her own well:
being, but the therapist may not succeed unless the need for self-care is -
framed in ways that allows the client to be better able to care for others.
For example, in an empowerment support group for women, the promo-_
tora or facilitator (see Chapter 6) constantly brings up the importance —
of self-care until it begins to be internalized and put into action, but the
concept itself appears somewhat alien to most of the participants.

The role of mother comprises a “mixed blessing.” Latina mothers
may experience considerable anxiety and a high degree of responsibil- _
ity in relation to their children’s safety. Mexican, Dominican, and Puerto _
Rican mothers may feel especially anxious about the dangers of the street _

The Persistence of Extended Kin 301

and the vulnerability of their children to Los Angeles or New York gangs
and believe that this danger will increase in proportion to the child’s
separation from his or her mother’s lap. On the positive side, the social
position of “mother” carries considerable status and commands respect,
including from women themselves.

In Chapters 9 and 11, I referred to the counternarratives of Latina
women that resist being seen by mainstream America as subjugated and
oppressed. They assert with pride the fundamental role they play in their
children’s moral education and the care with which they create a sense of
“home” for family members (Villenas, 2001). In payment for their sacri-
fice and dedication, mothers are the subject of much devotion, especially
apparent in the lavish Mother’s Day celebrations of Mexico. Indeed, moth-
ers, at least ideally, often enjoy a lifelong reverence from their children,
and especially from their sons.

The Mother-Son Bond in Patriarchal Contexts

Nowhere is parent-child culturally prescribed closeness and devotion
greater than in the relationship between a mother and an oldest or a

_ favorite son. This bond is mutually supportive. The mother may have a
_ strong influence even over a grown adult son, and he in turn may always

worship and side with his mother. A number of hypotheses about this
powerful attachment go beyond mere emotional connectedness and
enter the realm of family politics (Falicov & Brudner-White, 1983; Fali-
cov, 1998). Some writers speak of the emotional isolation of the mother
from her husband in patriarchal families, and the subsequent formation
of a supportive subfamily unit of mother and children that excludes the
husband. Still others regard the mother’s efforts to instill a fierce loyalty
and devotion in her son as a way of undermining the authority of the
patriarch and gaining ascendancy over him.

In my clinical experience, the devotion and protection of sons toward
their mothers is more apparent than that of daughters, in spite of the fact
that mothers and daughters spend more time together and share more
intimacies. Perhaps the son’s protection of the mother is an expression of
a benign or protective machismo into which he may have been socialized
to counteract the more traditional and negative domineering machismo
of the father. This role of protector may at times interfere with the son’s
relationship with his wife. In Chapter 1, the example of the Diaz Ortiz’s
family illustrates how a son convinces his wife to leave their infant with
his mother for practical reasons, but also to decrease his mother’s pain
of separation and his own anxiety over the departure. Further discussion
and illustration of triangles between husband, mother, and wife appear in
Chapter 11 and the case of Olivia, Federico, and his mother in Chapter 14.


--- Page 11 ---
302 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

The Meaning of Fatherhood

In the public’s narrative of Latino gender constructions, the father

expected to protect the mother by demanding that the children obey and

help her, while he remains only peripherally involved with daily caret,
ing, if at all. In ethnographic narratives, fathers may be playful, affe,
tionate, and do quite a bit of caretaking, particularly of young child:
(Gutmann, 1996; see also Chapter 11). .
The traditional pattern of father in the role of disciplinarian ap,
mother as mediator between father and children may become more ey;

contribute to a weakening

simply be trying to include himself in the family i

ly in the only way he know.
how. I asked Elena’s father, Mr. Morales, a Mexi i i if thi
might be the wre ‘ ‘ican immigrant, if thi:

MR. MORALES:
ON SUFFERING A “CIVILIAN COUP D’ETAT”

A congenial, feisty man, Mr. Morales rapidly answered me in the third persoi

(a form of common communication called an indirecta): “He, who appears _

to have military manners, has in fact suffered a civilian ‘coup d'état’ year

ago and has never been able to regain the presidency of the country.” This

metaphor for the ousted father became a central theme in the therapy. Mr.
Morales explained that he felt guilty toward his wife because in spite of great

effort, he couldn’t offer the family the financial ili ease
tabil:
envisioned. y stability he had originally

Mr. Morales recalled that because of complications after Mrs. Morales _

had their fourth child, the lack of medical insurance led to medical bills that
took many years to pay. To compensate for his failure, he tried to enlist the
older children’s cooperation in housework, hoping to make Mrs. Morales’s
life easier. The more the father insisted, the more the adolescents resisted,

rendering him frustrated and ineffective. Now Mr. Morales could see that —

some of his attempted solutions had become part of the problem, but he did
not know what else he could do. Having him shift from a disciplinarian to a
nurturing role became one of the goals of the clinical work.

While many theories regard Latino men’s dominance as based only
on traditional cultural values (see Chapter 11), other theories see it asa
response to structural factors in society. Male dominance may take on

e of the father’s authority. Sometimes a father
who appears controlling and intrusive with his adolescent children may

The Persistence of Extended Kin 303

reater significance when social stratification systems exclude members

ofa minority from public roles, access to resources, or fair recognition for
effort or other social rewards. The immigrant’s father position may also
_pe diminished by the migration process in a number of ways: underem-

Joyment, lack of language skills, and immigrant status.

A father such as Mr. Morales, who assumes a disciplinarian role in a
ulturally isolated situation, is less acceptable to the children because he
io longer represents a community of adults who uphold the same values.
he aloofness may be increased if he migrated first and his wife and
hildren came later. The spouses may have never totally recovered from

the separation, or the father’s promise of a better future may never have
materialized, decreasing permanently his prestige and influence. This

jtuation may be exacerbated if the wife has joined the workforce to help
ut financially. The husband may forcefully assert his authority with his
ife, who in turn signals to the children that their father is domineering

nd unfair. The children may see the mother as victimized and begin to
protect her, or they may feel bound by gratitude to her. This type of fam-
ily triangle may present special difficulties with adolescents who become
scornful and distant from the father, perhaps irreversibly.

The widespread cultural stereotype of the Latino father as the domi-
nant, authoritarian figure that makes all the decisions, is master of the

household, and uses corporal punishment to discipline the children is

contradicted by other images, views, and research data accumulated over
time.

Changing belief systems about gender roles (see Chapter 11 and
Falicov, 2010) coincide with my own observations, although I have also
encountered the more traditional authoritarian father and self-sacrificing
mother, particularly in my clients’ genograms of their families of origin.
My interpretation is simply that with any large group of people of any
nation, considerable diversity will be found to support a variety of pat-
terns. The fairest statement seems to be that Latino families are in transi-
tion, perhaps not so different from many families in Latin America and
everywhere, and they display a mixture of traditional and egalitarian pref-
erences.

Cultural Styles or Cultural Masks?

This chapter has addressed the danger of pathologizing familismo as
enmeshment or codependency. At the other extreme lies the danger of
romanticizing Latino family connectedness, including mother-son bonds
that may be maladaptive (see discussion of ethnic stereotyping as bias of
assessment in Chapter 3, pp. 98-100). There are situations when a clini-
cian may see a connection between a presenting pattern and a cultural


--- Page 12 ---
304 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 305
“pospitalized and heavily sedated. The psychiatrists felt that the mother-son
_ symbiosis was an intractable situation and strongly advised sending the boy
‘0 live with relatives in Costa Rica. Although Mrs. Gonzalez Torres said the
eparation was “like death to me,” she complied with the plan.

After some time, Eudora recovered, Frank Sr. returned to the mat-
jmonial bed, and the marital discord subsided. But soon after, the rela-
ives reported that Frank Jr. was having nightmares again. Immediately
the mother went to fetch the boy. Like a powerful magnet mother and son
mbraced each other again and locked the father out in mind and body.
‘oon after Frank Jr. developed terrors about going anywhere alone, includ-
ing the bathroom.

I supported and engaged the father in therapy because he offered a
ope for movement in a rigidly closed system. But when Frank Sr. began to
espond, Eudora wanted him out of the session. Attempting to form an alli-
nce and a boundary by seeing her alone prior to the conjoint sessions proved
ruitless. She kept on repeating: “Poor me and poor little boy.” We decided
0 challenge the rigidity indirectly by positively connoting the symptom and
upporting Eudora to help her son by going to school every day with Frank
fr., sitting with him at all times, and monitoring each and every one of his
activities, including lunch and bathroom breaks. Eudora needed to ask writ-
ten permission from the school principal for each of the activities every day.
Contrary to our expectations of paradoxical effects, not only did Eudora not
balk at the amount of work involved, but she cheerfully agreed to do every-
hing. Gradually, however, it was Frank Jr. who began to react. The other boys
were teasing him and calling him a baby. He asked his mother to stop treating
him so. One day Frank Jr. abruptly announced that he wanted to have his own
apartment with no mother, father, or wife—just two pets, a cat and a dog. He
_ would train the cat and the dog to live together from an early age, because “if
ou get them old, they fight all the time, like they [his parents] do.” Perhaps
Frank Jr. would begin to separate and grow up a little after all. Like other
breakthroughs with this family, this insight was short-lived.

Although cultural patterns, primarily those of family organization and
family life cycle, were entertained, the therapist did not fell prey to the cul-
ural mask of close family relationships or a culturally normative mother-
son attachment. The pattern in this family appeared to be one of oppressive
symbiotic embrace that left no room for individual autonomy. The therapist
worked to develop a multilevel interdisciplinary treatment plan that involved
the use of medication for mother and son and working collaboratively with
_ school personnel to keep Frank in school as much as possible. Couple ther-
_ apy was recommended and geared to create a better boundary between
_ marital and parental subsystems. The internal workings of the individuals
and the family unit were much more relevant to the treatment plan than
_ issues of migration, cultural diversity, or social justice. The pattern presen-
tation of this family fit with the pattern described in Chapter 3 regarding

preference but is not aware that sometimes the appearance of culture

mask or camouflage other family processes that could be problematic an
not truly cultural. Thus, clinicians who endeavor to be culturally respec
ful may be at risk for disregarding a number of fairly extreme, possiby
transcultural human problems that may appear as closeness but actual}
transcend cultural stylistic preferences. These problems are evident
repetitive, rigid behaviors and imbalances of interpersonal influence th;
lead to developmental impasses instead of growth. Such was the case of
Frank Gonzdlez Torres, Jr's family. This family of three illustrates parent
child connectedness gone awry, even though it has a culturally consona:
flavor. The focus on the child at the expense of the marital relationship,
the self-sacrifice of the mother, and the extreme closeness between the

mother and the boy all had a culturally plausible quality, but the degree,
the length of time, the rigidity of these behaviors, and the consequence
for family members were clearly beyond cultural expectations.

FRANK JR., AND HIS MOTHER:
“SEPARATING FROM MY SON WAS LIKE DEATH TO ME”

Frank Jr. was 9 years old when he was referred to therapy for night terror
and multiple fears. His mother, Mrs. Eudora Gonzalez Torres, was a heavy-set_
and very properly attired 45-year-old woman who looked much older. She was.
born and raised in Costa Rica and lived with her parents before she got m:
ried in her mid-30s. She had wanted to go to nursing school, but her mother
did not let her for fear that she might get sexually involved with somebody.
Frank’s father, meanwhile, had come from a poor and chaotic Honduran
family. He had left his family in his early teens and had fended for himself on
the streets, but remained suspicious and distant from others. When Eudora.
met Frank Sr. he was a single, very heavy, slow-mannered man a few years
older than she. Frank Sr. was ready to get married then, but Eudora felt sl
had to wait until her ill mother died before she could leave home. After her
mother died, Frank Sr. and Eudora got married and migrated together to
the U.S. :

Their initial marital adjustment was smooth until Frank Jr. was born.
In their words “the apple of the discord” was planted. Instantly mother and
son became an inseparable unit. They slept in the same bed, displacing Mr.
Gonzalez Torres to the living room sofa. Disagreements about handling the
boy mounted. Eudora protected the son and called the father a brutal and
uncaring ugly monster, a characterization that did not fit how the father
behaved in the interview. 4

The family first attempted to get help for Frank Jr. in kindergarten
when he developed extreme separation anxiety. Prior to the boy entering
first grade, mother and son suffered a conjoint emotional break and were


--- Page 13 ---
306 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 307

predisposition toward mental illness, and the treatment plan followed from _ sibling Loyalty Gone Awry

this assessment. Can there be too much sibling loyalty? In an interesting study Lobato et

]. (2012) found that in impoverished conditions, siblings of children with
developmental disabilities, such as Down syndrome or autism, were at risk
_ for school attendance issues, low academic performance, separation anxi-
_ ety, and agoraphobia. These risks could be attributed in part to stressors
_ such as obligations to translate at medical appointments and other fam-
ily caretaking responsibilities. But most compelling for practice consider-
_ ations was that these Latino children were most reluctant to express any
_ negative experiences or feelings they had due to their sibling’s disability.
It is unclear whether the parents instruct them to be silent or whether
__ their sibling loyalty is so strong that it would feel like a betrayal to be any-
_ thing other than self-sacrificing and family-centric.

Another example of excessive sibling loyalty was evident when a
woman, badly battered by her husband, appealed to his brothers—only to
be rebuffed and shunned by them under the guise that she must be lying
because “my brother could not do anything like that.” Other family mem-
_pers also sided with the perpetrator, leaving the wife as an unprotected
outsider.

The Gonzalez Torres family continued to have severe problems ang —
failed to achieve any greater degree of individuation or separation. Th;
type of extreme overinvolvement, fusion, or symbiosis is of a different
magnitude and quality than the stylistic preference for connectedness
and interdependence described here for Latinos. An article by Green |
and Werner (1996) makes an important contribution by differentiating
the concept of enmeshment into two different concepts: “function;
closeness-caregiving” and “dysfunctional intrusiveness.” Green and We
ner argue that some family relationships have a “superficial form of close.
ness” (high levels of contact, high degrees of disclosure) that derive from
coercion, collusion, and anxious attachment rather than from mutuality,

Like a close embrace held too long or too hard, the inability to free
each other tends to be experienced as an act of insecurity or control
rather than an act of affection or support. Labeling such relationships
as “extremely close” or “cohesive” masks their other qualities and
potentially invalidates the experience of the participants. (Green &
Werner, 1996, p. 120)

As discussed in Chapter 8, severe mental disorders can be aggravated The Influence of Birth Order
by migration and acculturative stress, but often they belong to categori
of universal, or at least transnational, human problems. Immigrant fami-
lies, like other families, come to therapy with problems of this nature,
although the content, meanings, and coping strategies may be organiz
around culture-specific issues.

Parents accord clear authority to older siblings and usually delegate some
supervisory and caretaking functions to them. In large families, com-
plex allocations of roles, division of labor, and individual compatibilities
timulate the formation of subgroups. Traditional gender role assignment
encourages girls to do household chores for the boys, who in turn are
_supposed to chaperone and protect their sisters outside the home. In the
humorous novel Estrella’s Quinceanera, the supervision of the protagonist
s frequently entrusted to her two incompetent brothers (Alegria, 2006).
Older siblings may teach early literacy skills, such as reading and
iting, during pretend play and didactic interactions with their younger
iblings (Obregon, 2012). The behavior of siblings affects other siblings in
multiple ways. For example, younger siblings of pregnant Mexican Ameri-
_ can teens report that their sister’s childbearing has affected them greatly.
_Ithas increased family stress and conflict, but they also felt that this expe-
rience has brought them closer to their older sister and has engendered a
great deal of love for the sister’s baby (East et al., 2011).
Continued emotional support, advice, and practical help among
adult siblings are tributes to the enduring connectedness of family ties
_ among Latinos. Nevertheless, quarrels and resentment among adult sib-
lings are also common. These may occur because younger siblings attempt

THE SIBLING BOND AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
FOR PRACTICE

Within the collectivistic or large-family Latino ideology, sibling ties are
strong. Fraternal solidarity and mutual help are ideals that parents instill
in their children from an early age. During childhood, siblings—along
with first cousins, or primo hermanos—may be constant companions. Par
ents prefer that their children have their own brothers, sisters, and co
ins as playmates, and children seem to be happy to do so. Competitio:
and fighting among siblings is tolerated, whereas cooperation, sharing,
and even sacrifice for a brother or sister are emphasized. Sibling bond:
endure throughout life; many immigrant adults live with a brother o1
sister temporarily or more permanently.


--- Page 14 ---
308 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 309
a more egalitarian relationship, but older siblings may continue to press__
their birth order or age hierarchy. Sibling quarrels may also be caused by _
parental favoritism, disagreements about inheritance, or unpaid debts.
Rifts among siblings, however, are seldom permanent. New family transi.
tions often serve as points of reunion and pathways to rejuvenate brothe:
and sister ties.

stiffness of John’s gringo language struggles. With this playfulness we could
move to talking about our ethnicities and countries of origin, and then what it
meant for each one of them to be Puerto Rican in Chicago. John and I talked
about our own ethnicities, gender, race, migrations, our sibling group, and
birth order, about the good things and the bad things in these categories and
experiences. We were friendly, genuine, and even shared some of our own
- questionable youthful experiences, the fun of it as well as the trouble it got us.
The five of us managed to feel a little closer to each other and were
able to diffuse the hierarchies and the differences somewhat, but inevitably
hey were there. And so John and I decided to face the three youngsters as
squarely as we could, by talking about our differences. We started with our
differences in age, race, and gender. John and I stepped out of our roles as
herapists briefly and talked about our roles as parents, in contrast to the
boys’ roles as children. I mentioned that I was a rather strict parent who
did not like it when my children sidestepped their obligations to themselves,
such as when they watched TV before doing their homework. Somewhat in
_ jest I confessed that I went around telling my children that if they watched
_too much TV, their brains would turn into mashed potatoes (my daughters
‘an attest that yes, indeed, I warned them often about these effects of TV
_watching!). The roaring, cracking, writhing laughter that followed went on
and on until Gilberto intervened forcefully saying, “Yeah! Hey, hey! Listen
_ listen listen to this: Can the stuff [airplane glue] turn your brains into mashed
potatoes? Can it, can it? Hey, tell the truth, the truth!” We said we thought it

__ could. And most amazing was the fact that they seemed to believe us.
In the remarkable process that followed, Gilberto, the oldest sibling,
became inspired to be almost primitively controlling of himself and his
ounger siblings. He instituted a system of surveillance and organized each
brother to become “a cop” for the other, in a fashion reminiscent of William
olding’s Ralph in Lord of the Flies (Golding, 1954). Anyone going near a
hardware store or a parking lot was punished by the other two. Once, when
‘afael and Chui teamed up and violated both rules, Gilberto abandoned
them in the streets, did not talk to them for days, and came to a session by

himself.

Sibling Therapy as Practice Resource

The strength of the sibling bond provides a rich therapeutic resource _
when parents are absent or not available due to incarceration, drug usage, -
or mental illness. This bond can also be part of an effective method of
cultural-generational mediation in family therapy. The therapist can first _
interview the parents separately, then the siblings, and later bring th
whole family together for a feedback session. In separate interviews, sib
lings can negotiate issues they might not bring up with their parents pres.
ent. Or their cooperation may be enlisted to extricate an overprotected
or a parentified child from the parental subsystem. As a separate modal.
ity, sibling therapy alone provides a good alternative when conventional _
family therapy is difficult or impossible—a frequent dilemma when famih
members are separated or disrupted because of migration, economics,
incarceration, or other struggles of poverty.

THE ROBLEDO BROTHERS: “CAN SNIFFING GLUE
TURN YOUR BRAINS INTO MASHED POTATOES?”

One of my first cases of sibling therapy was with the Robledo brothers: Gil
berto (age 13), Rafael (11), and Chui (9). These three Puerto Rican boys wer
inhaling airplane glue together to get high. After numerous failed attempts t
engage their mother, grandmother, or any other adults at home, we resorted.
to asking the boys’ probation officer to bring whomever he could get. He
came in with the three boys. With my cotherapist, an American man in hi
mid-30s who had learned Spanish in the Peace Corps, we spent the first tw
sessions building trust, discovering the individuality of each youngster, ani
understanding their relationships.

We spared them talking about their home situation. Their mother wa:
functionally and emotionally unavailable—engaged in drug abuse and prostt:
tution. Their daily home life, neighborhood, and school seemed dismal; the}
could not verbalize any strengths or home triumphs. We turned then to talk
ing about language and the various accents we all had; we each tried to int
tate our various accents; they made fun of my slower way of talking and I, i
turn, imitated how I heard the speed of their speech—and we all imitated thé

Gilberto taught me about the power of sibling love and leadership
when adults cannot nurture or control, but he also taught me about the
luman wish to care and be cared for, whatever it takes.

The influential position of an older sibling, particularly with his or
her immigrant parents, can be used to help a less favored or scapegoated
‘sibling. In the case that follows, an older brother’s intervention, by virtue
of his power as the oldest and his male gender, alleviated an interdepen-

‘dent, conflict-ridden relationship between his mother and his younger
sister.


--- Page 15 ---
310 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 311

jf the brother really knew, or just suspected, these events in Margarita’s life,
put the type of indirect communication, by allusion, is not atypical of a pre-
ferred cultural communication style that avoids direct confrontation.

MARGARITA’S OLDEST BROTHER AND HER CONFESSION :

Soon after Margarita’s mother and children joined her and her oldest ma:
ried brother in San Diego, the young Guatemalan mother found herse|
struggling with the consequences of years of estrangement from her mothe;
and children. Margarita was especially distressed by her ambivalence tow: :
her mother, Carmen. She felt gratitude over the crucial role Carmen playe

in taking care of her children while Margarita sought a better life in the U.
But Carmen had always been critical of her daughter's lifestyle and her rel;
tionships with young women and men. Respeto had stopped Margarita fro;
answering back until she couldn’t take it anymore and exploded in anger ane
threatened to leave her mother and children again. :

Gender issues played a definite role in that Carmen relied on an
respected the opinions of her sons, particularly the oldest, Juan Alberto,
whereas she treated Margarita as a second-class citizen. I suggested that the
bring Juan Alberto to the session, but Margarita worried that he would just go_
along with her chastising out of respect for his mother. I thought of a siblin,
interview, and Margarita agreed with the idea of enlisting her brother's help,

Juan Alberto’s input was enlightening. He was very supportive of Mar-
garita, had a lot of empathy for her predicament, and offered his own per
spective by telling her a family secret. Juan Alberto’s theory was that Carmen’
pressure on Margarita over issues such as a woman’s honor and reputatioy
stemmed from her own shame regarding what Juan Alberto called her own
“questionable past.” There were many indications that, during her youth, —
Carmen had worked as a barmaid and prostitute in a tiny Guatemalan town,
Apparently, one of Margarita and Juan Alberto’s half-siblings had died of
an acute infectious disease in his adolescence. Juan Alberto believed that
their mother interpreted this death as punishment for her own “low life,
and that’s why she returned so intensely to the Roman Catholicism of her _
childhood. Thus Juan Alberto attempted to dispel Margarita’s anguish over _
her mother’s accusations by shifting the blame toward their mother’s own
difficult past life. He also promised that he would talk to their mother abou
relaxing controls and criticisms, and stressing instead all the good things to
honor about Margarita’s hard work and accomplishments in the U.S.

But the story didn’t end there. Two weeks after that sibling session, Mar-
garita asked to see me alone. She started by telling me that she believed thi
story Juan Alberto had told—she now vaguely recollected hearing rumor:
about their mother’s past. But Margarita’s main fear was that perhaps Juan
Alberto also meant the story about her mother’s past as indirectas—that is, a:
an indirect communication toward her. Margarita started weeping, pouring
forth a confession about her own involvement in prostitution.? In fact, she.
never could have paid for the airplane tickets to the border, the “coyote” _
(smuggler) who crossed them through, or the rent for their apartment had |
she not supplemented her meager salary with prostitution. I will never know

Adult sibling therapy is helpful in (1) addressing, in a more balanced
_ manner, old, rigid ledgers and loyalties from the family of origin; (2)
gathering siblings together to help resolve serious issues between the par-
ents and the identified patient; and (3) raising issues that the parents are
unable to address, such as we have seen in the Moreno Carrillo family,
with its 16-member sibling group, in Chapter 7.

COMMUNICATION STYLES, CONFLICT AVOIDANCE,
AND POSITIVE EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION

Ideologies about connectedness and hierarchies, as reflected in the values
of familismo and respeto, may significantly shape the Latino family’ 's style of
communication, conflict management, and emotional expression—three
areas that receive frequent attention by clinicians. This section explores
some of the nuances of Latino communication and their implications
for the work of practitioners. An extensive case study demonstrates how
interactional styles affect family functioning and illustrates specific cul-
turally congruent clinical practices.

Language and Politeness

The amabilidad (amiability), gentility, and civility of the Spanish lan-
guage no doubt contribute to a politeness of demeanor, deportment, and
address. The Mexican American writer Sandra Cisneros (2002) offers a
sharp contrast between these pleasing forms and the direct, business-like
messages conveyed by the English language, which sound so painfully
inhuman to her father’s ears:

Because Uncle Fat-Face had been in the United States longer he gave
Father advice. Look, when speaking to police always begin with, “Hello,
my friend.” ;

In order to advance in society, Father thought it wise to memorize
several passages from the “Polite Phrases” chapter. I congratulate you.
Pass on, sir. Pardon my English. I have no answer to give you. It gives me the
greatest pleasure. And-I am of the same opinion. .

But his English was odd to American ears. He worked at his pro-
nunciation and tried his best to enunciate correctly. Sir, kindly direct


--- Page 16 ---
312 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 313

me to the water closet... . Please what do you say? May I trouble you to ask
for what time is? Do me the kindness to tell me how is. When all else failed
and Father couldn’t make himself understood, he could resort to—Spic
Spanish?

Qué strange was English. Rude and to the point. No one preceded
a request with a—Will you not be so kind as to do me the. favor of... ?-as one
ought. They just asked. Nor did they add—If God wills it—to their plans,
as if they were in audacious control of their own destiny. It was a barba-
rous language. Curt as the commands of a dog-trainer. “Sit.” “Speak up.”
And why did no one say “You are welcome.” Instead they grunted—“Uh-
huh” without looking him in the eye, and without so much as a “You are
very hind, mister, and may things go well for you.” (p. 70)

are also used to maintain harmony when the negative emotion at hand
is irritation or anger. A Mexican saying states, “The one who gets angry
loses.” So criticisms often take the form of allusion (e.g., “Some people
never change”), diminutives used in a sarcastic way, and belittlement.
Similarly, Cubans use choteo (humor) as a way of ridiculing or making fun
of people, situations, or things. Choteo may involve exaggerations, jokes,
or satire to modify tense situations. Dichos or proverbs are sayings that
encapsulate wisdom, timeless life observations, or comments about the
human condition.

Harmony is also maintained by engaging in “light” triangles. Alli-
_ ances, especially when based on gender rapport, provide an emotional
outlet in the form of gossip and secrets. These may not necessarily be det-
rimental, as clinicians are often trained to think, because light triangles
may at times deflect attention from petty annoyances and enhance the
stability of family relationships (Falicov, 1998).

Words of endearment and compliments about a person’s appearance,
dress, or smile provide support for a friend or a family member’s positive
qualities. Indeed, warmth flows from these positive verbal expressions
-and from physical proximity and gestures. As mentioned previously, a
couch in my office that accommodates only one European American par-
ent and one child comfortably seats one or two Latino parents with two
r three children, who make liberal use of laps! Touching, kissing, and
hugging happen spontaneously, particularly between Latino parents and
children. But they extend to other friendly relationships too—in Mexico,
Puerto Rico, Cuba, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Argentina, Chile, and Colom-
ia, teachers kiss pupils, hairdressers kiss their clients, and children kiss
he parents of their friends without any hesitation.

From early on, in spite of national variations many Latinos, like Cisneros’
father, are raised with the notion that much can be achieved interperson
ally if people talk nicely, explain a lot, are not confrontational, and if pos.
sible, give compliments.

Harmony and Humor: Indirectas, Choteo, and Dichos

In keeping with their desire to preserve family harmony and avoid inter
personal conflict, collectivistic cultures favor indirect, implicit, and cover:
or humorous communications. People publicly agree—or at least do no}
disagree—with each other in order to “get along” and not make other:
uncomfortable—yes, the latter is important. Conversely, assertiveness,
open differences of opinion, and direct demands for clarification are seer
as rude or insensitive to others’ feelings. Feelings of anger and disappoint
ment seem fairly universal; what changes is how they are expressed. Ont
can speculate that this style of communication may be more prevalent i
the impoverished and subordinated social classes toward the more affh
ent, but in general terms, as in the quote by Sandra Cisneros, the expect
tion of politeness and indirectness seems to be a cultural preference.
The use of impersonal third-person rather than first-person p)
nouns is one aspect of this style. For example, by stating “One could be
proud of...” rather than “I am proud of . . .” the person is viewed a
appropriately subtle, selfless, and bien educado or having good manne
(see Chapter 12). The use of allusions, proverbs, sayings, and parable:
convey an opinion is commonplace, especially among Mexicans and m:
Central and South Americans. Cubans seem more adept than Mexic
and Puerto Ricans at directness, softened by a mordant, piquant,
sometimes even outrageous sense of humor. The result of all this
apparent harmony, occasionally at the expense of a clear understandi
of the other's intent. Indirectas or allusions without reaching confrontatio

IMPLICATIONS OF COMMUNICATION STYLES
FOR PRACTICE

he Latino culture’s emphasis on smooth relationships, social graces,
_and personalismo (building personal relationships) has significant implica-
ions for family clinical practice. On occasion, communication styles that
emphasize indirectness and civility in the name of avoiding conflict can
ecome excessive and lead to concealment, lies, and intrigues. At other
mes they may provide veiled messages sent on circuitous ways. Distin-
uishing the degree to which such patterns of indirect communication
e simply cultural styles or reflect problems of a particular family is part
f the clinician’s exploration with the family. Earlier in this chapter, we
onsidered the distinction between cultural styles and cultural masks as


--- Page 17 ---
314 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

one way to disentangle these issues. Interestingly, in Frank Jr’s case, a
saying was used by the family to describe what happened to the couple
when Frank jr. was born. The saying was “the apple of the discord was
planted”—a clue to a process that differed from a cultural expectation. In
general terms, staying within the culturally preferred modes of relating

ensures the formation of a better working relationship and the availability —

of many avenues for therapeutic practices, as we discuss next.

The Clinician’s Attention to Communication Style

An initial social phase that transmits the practitioner’s interest in the fam. _

ily members is best. Even if attention to referral sheets or records is neces-
sary, this can be done in a friendly, engaged, and interactive manner from
the beginning. Manifesting real interest in the client's life details, his or
her theory about why the problem exists, and the attempted solutions is
critical, given the Latino emphasis on personalismo. A tone of acceptance

and patience that avoids confrontation is advisable. I have, on occasion,

abruptly interrupted a family member who was monopolizing a session or
called someone on an inconsiderate behavior rather than finding a more
indirect form of addressing the issues. Although I had thought that the
therapeutic alliance was well established, the consequences of my direct
ness were negative.

An intense emotive style and person-centered approach appear

to be more appealing than a businesslike, structured, or task-oriented
approach. Latinos seem to respond more openly when feelings are subtly
elicited than when they are directly asked to describe or explain thei
emotions and reactions. An experiential approach that emphasizes “tell-
ing it like it is” or “baring one’s soul” and interpreting nonverbal lan-
guage may well inhibit clients. S
Of course, a clinician must not impose, out of presumed “cultural

attunement,” a particular style of relating regardless of how the family

presents itself, so these general guidelines only apply if the observatio:

warrant it. Although contracts and behavioral treatment goals might be

too task-oriented—most Latinos would not be comfortable scheduling cer

tain times to be intimate or to resolve problems—the clinician can assign

“conditional homework,” perhaps asking the family to think about how i
would feel to engage in a particular task should the occasion arise. Sud
a technique is not only more collaborative and less presumptive, but it
also consonant with a culture that values serendipity, chance, and spont
neity in interpersonal relationships.

Whatever the theoretical orientation or type of practice, it is adv!
able for practitioners to invite the family’s feedback about the proces

The Persistence of Extended Kin 315

In a culture that emphasizes cooperation and respect for authority, cli-
ents may feel that it is impolite to openly disagree with the practitioners.
Encouraging the family to express both their positive and negative reac-
tions to the professional’s opinions helps to establish a tone of mutuality
and gives an opportunity for feedback to clients that might otherwise not
take the initiative out of politeness.

The Use of Stories, Humor, Allusions, Metaphors, Sayings,
and Diminutives

As a relationship develops between practitioner and client, the practitio-

ner’s use of humor, allusions, and diminutives softens the directness of
treatment and are often more effective forms of delivery because they

_ mirror preferred cultural interactional styles. Disclosure can be facilitated
when the practitioner becomes a philosopher of life through storytelling,

anecdotes, and metaphors. Use of analogies, proverbs, aphorisms, fables,
or sayings as mysterious or unexpected communications that transmit

_ an existential sense of the absurd or the reversals of life fits with cultural
themes.

The use of proverbs is common in many cultures and perhaps par-
ticularly more so in traditional and rural cultures. It may also be the case

_ that the use of proverbs is further reinforced in groups that attend church
services, since sermons often expand on the thinking encapsulated or

evoked by Christian proverbs. Many Latinos are adept with these meta-

_ phorical or poetic statements. They call them proverbios, refranes, aforis-
__ mos, or dichos depending on the country of origin.

A therapist’s knowledge and timely use of dichos (proverbs or sayings)

is a valuable and aesthetic communicational resource (Zuniga, 1992; Bra-
cero, 1998). Clients are likely to remember, chuckle about, and ponder
something said via this medium. In the couple or family therapy situation,
Isometimes find it helpful to say something indirectly to a family member
Via a proverb rather than in a more direct or confrontational way. Often,

‘at person is able to hear the message and not feel threatened or “uncov-

ered” in front of others, who may or may not understand to what the prov-

rb refers. In the case of Aldrete Mujia illustrated later in this chapter, I

use the Christian proverb “Let he [she] who is without sin cast the first
Stone” to send an indirect or veiled message to the adolescent daughter
about her double standard regarding transparency.

_ Being Argentine, I know a good number of dichos, so sometimes I tell
ients that if we were in Argentina I might use such-and-such proverb—do

‘they have anything similar for this situation in Costa Rica? And I always
learn. For example, one time I said to Mexican parents: “If parents cannot


--- Page 18 ---
316 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 317

example, as well as in group support or therapy meetings so that proverbs
can be selected for discussions. Nava’s book It Is All in the Frijoles (2000)
is another easy and fun reference for folktales, stories, and dichos that can
be used for all age groups.

agree on how to raise their kids, the kids can ignore parents and go on
doing what they want. Do you have a saying for that situation?” Immedi-
ately I got this response: “A rio revuelto, ganancia de pescador” (When the
river water is agitated, the fishermen win). From then on, these parents
used the saying many times to help them become more united, so I have
used this saying with other parents or with mothers and grandmothers in
conflict over raising children.

Clients can be asked if family or friends have a saying that would help
in circumstances or experiences such as the ones they are undergoing,
Santiago-Rivera et al. (2002) provide a nice example of asking clients for
the proverbs that help them. The therapist asked a Bolivian woman who
suffered from discrimination and oppression if she had a dicho that helped
her cope. The client answered “El oro brilla hasta en el basurero” (Gold can
shine even in a garbage can). Asking clients for their own proverbs has
the merit of not assuming that they would understand or respond to any :
proverb or that their meanings would be similar to the therapist’s. In a
delightful way, Santiago-Rivera et al. (2002) use a dicho to introduce each
chapter of their book about counseling Latinos. :

Many sayings, such as the one by the Bolivian woman, convey
strengths and a resilient response to adversity. Consider, for example,
“Dios aprieta, pero no ahorca” (God squeezes you, but he does not strangle
you), and “No hay mal que por bien no venga” (There is no evil from which
some good cannot come). Proverbs or dichos also provide opportunities
to express human contradictions or inconsistencies. For example, a pro-
tective attitude toward finding out something painful is conveyed by the
saying “Ojos que no ven, corazon que no siente” (When you do not see some-
thing, your heart will not suffer), but in the same breath, the opposite can —
be expressed: “Ojos que ven, no envejecen” (Eyes that see do not grow old).
One must not assume meanings without inquiring in each case, to under-
stand better what a client may mean by using a particular proverb, as the
meanings are nuanced when applied to the particular case.

Some of the attitudes conveyed in the sayings above have been inter-
preted in a deficit framework as fatalism or resignation and implying
an external locus of control over one’s destiny. This negative evaluation
overlooks the wisdom and resilience of accepting situations that can:
not be changed or the hope that comes from faith when life circum.
stances are trying. (For further discussion of fatalism, see Chapter 7,
pp. 212-213.) :

Many of these proverbs are similar across Spanish speakers, but oth-
ers vary or exist only in their particular countries of origin. A book by
Zona (1996) states the countries of origin of each proverb. It is a cul-
tural resource that can be strategically placed in the waiting room, for

Generational and Gender Clashes

The tendency to maintain harmony and avoid conflict in a large, complex
family network may be less sustainable for adolescents or young adults
raised in the U.S. who may challenge parents to become more “modern”
(Gil & Vasquez, 1996). The following case illustrates these issues and
offers helpful practice ideas for dealing with large families that live in col-
lectivistic, extended family settings.

THE ALDRETE MUJIAS:
“LET SHE WHO IS WITHOUT SIN CAST THE FIRST STONE”

The Aldrete Mujias were a traditional, middle-class, business-oriented, Cath-
olic family, living in a conservative, white neighborhood of San Diego. The
nuclear group consisted of mother, Marta (age 35); father, Robert (36); and
four children, Jennifer (14), Andrew (13), Chris (9), and Silvina (5). Two very
large extended families lived close by. Robert was the first son and the second
of eight siblings, all of whom lived with their spouses. Many of the spouses
also had extended family nearby. Robert’s mother, Dolores Aldrete, lived
eight blocks away from him in a home that was the hub of many family activi-
ties. For years Robert, Marta, and the children had enjoyed la comida semanal
(an extended family weekly meal ritual) and a game of lotto (Joteria) at Dolo-
res’s house every Sunday afternoon (see Figure 10.1).

Marta Aldrete Mujia was the third of seven siblings. Her mother, Lourdes,
had a wonderful, large home two blocks away, where the grown children and
the grandchildren spent many weekends. The house grounds became a recre-
ational camp for the grandchildren every summer. Both Robert's and Marta’s
families of origin had a steady Catholic church affiliation and celebrated all
religious holidays and birthdays together.

During the first nuclear family interview I learned that Jennifer had
been living with Abuelita (Grandma) Dolores for the past 3 weeks, following
a particularly nasty row with her mother, Marta. In fact, Jennifer had been
fighting constantly with Marta, spreading the news on both sides of the fam-
ily that she despised her and would never respect her again. Marta felt hurt,
embarrassed, and afraid of the public opinion of both families, the neigh-
bors, and the school, all of whom were aware that Jennifer had gone to live at
Abuelita Dolores’s house.


--- Page 19 ---
318 FAMILY ORGANIZATION
s s s
65 Eight blocks x («)
away’ Dolores Lourdes
Two blocks _

away
x IG) »)
se [Robert °°/] Catalina _ se] Marta

3 weeks Jennifer Andrew —— Chris Silvina
Es Es E E

Both families strong Catholicism

FIGURE 10.1, The Aldrete Mujfa family genogram.

Robert, though passive and uninvolved, completely supported his wife _
Marta. He was equally tired of Jennifer's willfulness, demands for privileges
such as getting car rides to visit friends, and sassy retorts when her wishes
were not granted immediately. There seemed to be a peer-like relationship
between Jennifer and her mother rather than a hierarchical relationshi
involving parental respect. Instead, the two grandmothers were the executive
subsystem of the family.

Because so many people were involved, piecing together a coherent story
was as fascinating as it was frustrating. For example, I learned from Jennifer
that Marta had shoved her lightly once or twice during their squabbles, and
that unbeknown to her parents, Jennifer had sought revenge by reporting h
mother to the school counselor. However, feeling confused by the school’s
strong reaction, she begged school authorities not to report her mother to
CPS, so the school decided to maintain close observations and regular me
ings with Jennifer until they understood the situation better. Building m
therapeutic alliance with Jennifer also required that I keep this secret con!
dential, at least temporarily. :

Meanwhile, Jennifer, who had all the entitlements that come from being
the first and favorite grandchild in two large extended Latino families, had
secured a lot of sympathetic supporters among her paternal uncles, aunts,
and cousins, who had subtly shunned Marta by not calling her or asking how
she was doing after Jennifer had moved to the grandmother's house. Mar!
was mortified. She felt that years of hard work had vanished and her re
tation as a mother was tarnished forever. She feared the family’s judgment!

The Persistence of Extended Kin 319

and stopped the Sunday meals with Abuelita Dolores. She was losing her old
terrain as Jennifer invaded it, Meanwhile, Jennifer was getting situated with
the paternal grandmother, Dolores, and a paternal, single aunt, Tia (Aunt)
Catalina (29), who was living with her mother while between jobs.

PRACTICE IDEAS FOR THE ALDRETE MUJIA FAMILY
Interviewing Extended Family Subsystems—Grandmother and Aunt

Iinterviewed Abuelita Dolores and Tia Catalina alone. Much to my surprise,
Abuelita Dolores seemed to speak with “two sides of her mouth.” She catered
to every one of Jennifer's wishes, cooked every one of her meals, let her talk
for hours on the phone, and had frequent conversations with her in which she
criticized Marta with venom, wondering, for example, if her unkemptness and
emotionality were connected to Lourdes’s (the other grandmother) upbring-
ing of Marta. Yet behind Jennifer's back, Grandma Dolores expressed quite
a different opinion. She was critical of how willful, poorly mannered, and
inconsiderate Jennifer was. She was even somewhat sympathetic about how
difficult it must be for Marta to raise Jennifer. Had the preservation of har-
mony and indirect communication gone awry or at least too far, I wondered?
The intrigues of the extended family and Marta’s self-imposed ostracism were
escalating and needed attention.

The indirectness of communication can compound the obvious difficul-
ties of assessing many interrelated issues. With large families, practitioners
can mobilize information to initiate and monitor a process of change in
two ways. One is to convene the entire family network and obtain as many
opinions and stories as possible. The use of comparative, circular question-
ing (Fleuridas et al., 1986) is particularly helpful in this process (e.g., the
clinician might ask, “Who is the most concerned about Jennifer's living with

abuelita?” or “Robert, how does your mother respond when Marta declines

invitations for the Sunday comida?”). The other method is to select a family

member who is more peripheral to the problem than those in the consulting
family unit, but central enough that he or she can communicate or “link”
with the larger group (Landau-Stanton, 1990). Another way to think about
‘the “link” member is as a symbolic “cotherapist,” as illustrated in our con-

inuing case.

t inlisting One Extended Family Member as “Cotherapist” or “Link”

fall the family members I had met, Tia Catalina impressed me as the most
vel-headed and psychologically minded. She seemed to have a more bal-
inced and perhaps more bicultural appraisal of the issues between parents
ind adolescent children and understood the dangers of taking sides. Catalina

believed that the family should have gone to counseling a long time ago. She


--- Page 20 ---
320 FAMILY ORGANIZATION

also felt it was time for her brother, Robert, to be less peripheral to his family
and not delegate so much of the parenting to the women. After asking the —
Aldretes’ permission, I invited Catalina to be my cotherapist.

Asking Cotherapist-Extended Family Member to Restore Order

I relied on Catalina to normalize the situation in the extended setting. Her
task was to reopen Abuelita Dolores’s home for Sunday meals and reestablish _
routines that had been nurturing for everybody. She also was to encourage
Robert to help Marta continue with “life as usual” while Jennifer remained
at Grandma’s house, rather than create new escalations and polarizations.
Remaining calm, clear, and involved would empower Marta and raise her
in the hierarchy—these would allow a shift away from her usual responses of
excessive civility or angry outbursts.

Working with Parental Subsystem to Empower Them against Alliance of Child
and Grandmother

I met with Marta and Robert and encouraged them to become more involved
in daily decisions concerning Jennifer. Marta needed to be more effective in
providing limits for Jennifer, and for the other children too, before things got
out of control. Usually Marta felt overpowered by Jennifer (who had knows -
since childhood that she could always rely on her paternal grandmother’
backing). Following a confrontation with Jennifer, Marta usually became
ashamed of how she had handled things, feared the larger family’s backlash,
and either gave in to Jennifer or retreated—only to receive further challenge
and contempt from Jennifer. Although Robert appropriately sided with his
wife, he had never been aware of how his mother’s spoiling of Jennifer unde
mined Marta’s authority. Out of respeto and a sense that it was normal for a
grandmother to spoil the granddaughter, he had never talked to Abuelig
Dolores about this issue. But now, as he and Marta were making plans t
bring Jennifer home, he broached the subject. He felt that his family of pro:
creation needed to function as a more bounded nuclear family, while remat
ing part of an integrated extended network.

Utilizing Older Son's Influence with His Mother

As we have seen earlier in this chapter, often an oldest son may interact wil
his mother in mutually persuasive ways. It was actually not that difficult fc E
Robert to convince his mother to let go of Jennifer, as the girl had becol :
rather rebellious toward her grandmother's caretaking behaviors. Althoug]

careful questioning of Jennifer failed to really clarify her contempt for Ie
mother, she appeared to admire Catalina and me. She often asked me care
related questions and wanted to see the books in my office. She was impress€
to see books with my name on the cover.

The Persistence of Extended Kin 321

Interviewing All the Generations of Women about “Women’s Culture
and Gender Transition”

In a joint session with all the women—Dolores, Marta, Jennifer, Catalina,
and myself—I decided to explore “women’s issues,” focused on cultural and
personal conceptions about the meaning of being a woman. Self-possession,
calmness, and self-confidence emerged as the qualities Jennifer held in high-
est esteem for present and future role modeling. She felt that her mother,
Marta, who was alternately intimidated and submissive or rageful and
irrational, was not to be respected. Catalina proved to be the invaluable
bridge—as a woman in cultural transition, she could blend views and values.

All of us talked about the pros and cons of traditional and of more modern
behavior.

Using a Proverb to Signal Indirectly the Need for Accountability
in One Family Member

The contrasts between direct and indirect at communication, including

secrets, lies, and duplicity, were brought up. Jennifer was furious at her
mother’s meekness and insisted on the need for a cultural change toward

openness and resolution of conflicts, particularly with the grandmother
(she chose not to mention the grandmother’s duplicity). And, of course, I
was the only one who knew that Jennifer was not above reproach when it
came to duplicity and lack of transparency, given her secret denunciation of
her mother to the school counselor. I decided to make her more internally
accountable by alluding to her own secret revenge indirectly, with the help

of a Christian biblical proverb in Spanish that Jennifer understood: “La que

asie libre de pecado que tire la primera piedra” (Let she who is without sin cast
the first stone).

Marta, feeling supported in her role as mother by Catalina and me,

became self-critical about her own emotional style of dealing with prob-
lems, basically agreeing with Jennifer. She also praised Jennifer's desires to
be “more than I could accomplish.” The changed tone in Marta’s voice vis-
ibly diminished Jennifer's combativeness and stimulated all of the women
_ to assume a more self-reflective stance and philosophical discussion about

culture and generation. Marta was encouraged by all of us to begin to regard

herself as a woman in cultural transition, with many opportunities to rein-
vent herself, both culturally and personally. A process of greater transpar-

ncy and healing had begun with several women of four generations engaged

In constructing positive models of womanhood and types of communication

hat fit their contexts and historical times.

After the initial isolation of solo immigrants that we discussed in
hapter 3, over time through reunification and growth, there is a plethora


--- Page 21 ---
322 FAMILY ORGANIZATION The Persistence of Extended Kin 323
of others from whom to get help in Latinos families, as well as many close
and distant relationships that occupy their lives. Clinicians usually know
little about the resources provided and the constraints imposed by large
nuclear and extended family arrangements unless they regularly engage
many of the players in large families.

Yet, it is also important to remember that there may be a price to pay
for this help, particularly when these systems of care may preserve har.
mony by secretiveness. The challenge is to remain constantly aware that a
different model of individual development and family relationships may
be operating than the conyentional European American version, or rather
the version promoted in most psychotherapy approaches. The extended
family model may be operating even when families are fragmented across
countries and undergo frequent expansions and contractions in family
membership. The topics I have selected for this chapter—connectedness
the cast of characters with their positions in the family hierarchy, commu:
nication, conflict resolution, and emotional expression—are particularh
relevant, especially when one considers the degree of consonance or dis.
sonance between the “maps” of the family and those of the practitioner.
These are also dimensions of family life in which cultural continuity, cul
tural change, culture clash—and eventual biculturalism take place.

her leave her occupation and concentrate on job training and spiritual
renewal.

3. From Caramelo. Copyright 2002 by Sandra Cisneros. Published
by Vintage Books in paperback in 2003 and originally in hardcover by
Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. By permission of Susan Bergholz Literary Services,
New York, NY, and Lamy, NM. All rights reserved.

In the next chapter, family bonds figure highly again, but with an —
emphasis on couple relationships. Connectedness for couples may take
on quite different meanings for Latino spouses who might be in cul-
tural transition from traditional to modern models of couplehood and
for whom cultural scripts about gender alter social constructions of m:
riage, beliefs, and behaviors within intimate relationships.

NOTES

1. From A Glass of Water by Jimmy Santiago Baca. Reprinted with
permission. :

2. Women who live with a boyfriend or a husband may still work in
nightclubs as a bargirl or escort. The money helps women who have ni
income, education, or skills with the economic hardships, but often pre:
ents moral dilemmas for the women and tensions with their families, as in
Margarita’s case. In one of my cases, a Colombian mother who had man:
aged to escape a sexually exploitative relationship in her country amassed
significant funds from her work as a solo prostitute in the U.S. to send for
her two adolescent sons to join her. Among her motivations for bringin
her sons was that the 17-year-old had started a life of prostitution himself
in the streets of Bogota. After they arrived, a faith-based group helped
