--- Page 1 ---
Other Books by Henri J.M. Nouwen

CLOWNING IN ROME
CREATIVE MINISTRY

A CRY FOR MERCY
REACHING OUT

THE GENESEE DIARY
THE WOUNDED HEALER
LIFESIGNS

THE ROAD TO DAYBREAK

WOUNDED HEALER

Ministry in Contemporary Society

Henri J. M. Nouwen

TEXT COMPLETE AND UNABRIDGED

NI

IMAGE BOOKS

DOUBLEDAY
NEW YORK LONDON TORONTO SYDNEY AUCKLAND



--- Page 2 ---
The Wounded Healer

INTRODUCTION

In the middle of our convulsive world men and women
raise their voices time and again to announce with in-
credible boldness that we are waiting for a Liberator.
We are waiting, they announce, for a Messiah who will
free us from hatred and oppression, from racism and
war—a Messiah who will let peace and justice take
their rightful place.

If the ministry is meant to hold the promise of this
Messiah, then whatever we can learn of His coming
will give us a deeper understanding of what is called
for in ministry today.

How does our Liberator come? I found an old leg-
end in the Talmud which may suggest to us the begin-
ning of an answer:

Rabbi Yoshua ben Levi came upon Elijah the
prophet while he was standing at the entrance of
Rabbi Simeron ben Yohai’s cave .. . He asked
Elijah, “When will the Messiah come?” Elijah
replied,

“Go and ask him yourself.”

“Where is he?”

81



--- Page 3 ---
“Sitting at the gates of the city.”

“How shall I know him?”

“He is sitting among the poor covered with
wounds. The others unbind all their wounds at the
same time and then bind them up again. But he
unbinds one at a time and binds it up again, say-
ing to himself, ‘Perhaps I shall be needed: if so I
must always be ready so as not to delay for a mo-
ment.’” (Taken from the tractate Sanhedrin)

The Messiah, the story tells us, is sitting among the
poor, binding his wounds one at a time, waiting for the
moment when he will be needed. So it is too with the
minister. Since it is his task to make visible the first
vestiges of liberation for others, he must bind his own
wounds carefully in anticipation of the moment when
he will be needed. He is called to be the wounded
healer, the one who must look after his own wounds
but at the same time be prepared to heal the wounds of
others.

He is both the wounded minister and the healing
minister, two concepts ‘I would like to explore in this
last chapter.

I. THE WOUNDED MINISTER

The Talmud story suggests that, because he binds his
own wounds one at a time, the Messiah would not
have to take time to prepare himself if asked to help
someone else. He would be ready to help. Jesus has
given this story a new fullness by making his own bro-
ken body the way to health, to liberation and new life.
Thus like Jesus, he who proclaims liberation is called
not only to care for his own wounds and the wounds of

82

others, but also to make his wounds into a major
source of his healing power.

But what are our wounds? They have been spoken
about in-many ways by many voices. Words such as
“alienation,” “separation,” “isolation” and “loneliness”
have been used as the names of our wounded condi-
tion. Maybe the word “loneliness” best expresses our
immediate experience and therefore most fittingly ena-
bles us to understand our brokenness. The loneliness
of the minister is especially painful; for over and above
his experience as a man in modern society, he feels an
added loneliness, resulting from the changing meaning
of the ministerial profession itself.

1. Personal loneliness

We live in a society in which loneliness has become
one of the most painful human wounds. The growing
competition and rivalry which pervade our lives from
birth have created in us an acute awareness of our iso-
lation. This awareness has in turn left many with a
heightened anxiety and an intense search for the expe-
rience of unity and community. It has also led people
to ask anew how love, friendship, brotherhood and sis-
terhood can free them from isolation and offer them a
sense of intimacy and belonging. All around us we see
the many ways by which the people of the western
world are trying to escape this loneliness. Psycho-
therapy, the many institutes which offer group experi-
ences with verbal and nonverbal communication tech-
niques, summer courses and conferences supported by
scholars, trainers and “huggers” where people can
share common problems, and the many experiments
which seek to create intimate liturgies where peace is
not only announced but also felt—these increasingly

83



--- Page 4 ---
“
popular phenomena are all signs of a painful attempt
to break through the immobilizing wall of loneliness.

But the more I think about loneliness, the more I
think that the wound of loneliness is like the Grand
Canyon—a deep incision in the surface of our exist-
ence which has become an inexhaustible source of
beauty and self-understanding.

Therefore I would like to voice loudly and clearly
what might seem unpopular and maybe even disturb-
ing: The Christian way of life does not take away our
loneliness; it protects and cherishes it as a precious gift.
Sometimes it seems as if we do everything possible to
avoid the painful confrontation with our basic human
loneliness, and allow ourselves to be trapped by false
gods promising immediate satisfaction and quick relief.
But perhaps the painful awareness of loneliness is an
invitation to transcend our limitations and look beyond
the boundaries of our existence. The awareness of
loneliness might be a gift we must protect and guard,
because our loneliness reveals to us an inner emptiness
that can be destructive when misunderstood, but filled
with promise for him who can tolerate its sweet pain.

When we are impatient, when we want to give up
our loneliness and try to overcome the separation and
incompleteness we feel, too soon, we easily relate to
our human world with devastating expectations. We ig-
nore what we already know with a deep-seated, intui-
tive knowledge—that no love or friendship, no inti-
mate embrace or tender kiss, no community, commune
or collective, no man or woman, will ever be able to
satisfy our desire to be released from our lonely condi-
tion. This truth is so disconcerting and painful that we
are more prone to play games with our fantasies than
to face the truth of our existence. Thus we keep hoping
that one day we will find the man who really under-

84

stands our experiences, the woman who will bring
peace to our restless life, the job where we can fulfill
our potentials, the book which will explain everything,
and the place where we can feel at home. Such false
hope leads us to make exhausting demands and pre-
pares us for bitterness and dangerous hostility when we
start discovering that nobody, and nothing, can live up
to our absolutistic expectations.

Many marriages are ruined because neither partner
was able to fulfill the often hidden hope that the other
would take his or her loneliness away. And many
celibates live with the naive dream that in the intimacy
of marriage their loneliness will be taken away.

When the minister lives with these false expectations
and illusions he prevents himself from claiming his
own loneliness as a source of human understanding,
and is unable to offer any real service to the many who
do not understand their own suffering.

2. Professional loneliness

The wound of loneliness in the life of the minister
hurts all the more, since he not only shares in the
human condition of isolation, but also finds that his
professional impact on others is diminishing. The min-
ister is called to speak to the ultimate concerns of life:
birth and death, union and separation, love and hate.
He has an urgent desire to give meaning to people’s
lives. But he finds himself standing on the edges of
events and only reluctantly admitted to the spot where
the decisions are made.

In hospitals, where many utter their first cry as well
as their last words, ministers are often more tolerated
than required. In prisons, where men’s desire for liber-
ation and freedom is most painfully felt, a chaplain

85



--- Page 5 ---
feels like a guilty bystander whose words hardly move
the wardens. In the cities, where children play between
buildings and old people die isolated and forgotten, the
protests of priests are hardly taken seriously and their
demands hang in the air like rhetorical questions.
Many churches decorated with words announcing sal-
vation and new life are often little more than parlors
for those who fee] quite comfortable in the old life, and
who are not likely to let the minister’s words change
their stone hearts into furnaces where swords can be
cast into plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks.

The painful irony is that the minister, who wants to
touch the center of men’s lives, finds himself on the pe-~
tiphery, often pleading in vain for admission. He never
seems to be where the action is, where the plans are
made and the strategies discussed. He always seems to
arrive at the wrong places at the wrong times with the
wrong people, outside the walls of the city when the
feast is over, with a few crying women.

A few years ago, when I was chaplain of the
Holland-America line, I was standing on the bridge of
a huge Dutch ocean liner which was trying to find its
way through a thick fog into the port of Rotterdam.
The fog was so thick, in fact, that the steersman could
not even see the bow of the ship. The captain, carefully
listening to a radar station operator who was explain-
ing his position between other ships, walked nervously
up and down the bridge and shouted his orders to the
steersman. When he suddenly stumbled over me, he
blurted out: “God damn it, Father, get out of my
way.” But when I was ready to run away, filled with
feelings of incompetence and guilt, he came back and
said: “Why don’t you just stay around. This might be
the only time I really need you.”

There was a time, not too long ago, when we felt like

86

captains running our own ships with a great sense of
power and self-confidence. Now we are standing in the
way. That is our lonely position: We are powerless, on
the side, liked maybe by a few crew members who
swab the decks and goof off to drink a beer with us,
but not taken very seriously when the weather is fine.

The wound of our loneliness is indeed deep. Maybe
we had forgotten it, since there were so many distrac-
tions. But our failure to change the world with our
good intentions and sincere actions and our undesired
displacement to the edges of life have made us
aware that the wound is still there.

So we see how loneliness is the minister’s wound not
only because he shares in the human condition, but
also because of the unique predicament of his profes-
sion. It is this wound which he is called to bind with
more care and attention than others usually do. For a
deep understanding of his own pain makes it possible

-'for him to convert his weakness into strength and to

offer his own experience as a source of healing to those
who are often lost in the darkness of their own misun-
derstood sufferings. This is a very hard call, because
for a minister who is committed to forming a commu-
nity of faith, loneliness is a very painful wound which
is easily subject to denial and neglect. But once the
pain is accepted and understood, a denial is no longer
necessary, and ministry can become a healing service.

Il. THE HEALING MINISTER

How can wounds become a source of healing? This
is a question which requires careful consideration. For
when we want to put our wounded selves in the service

87



--- Page 6 ---
of others, we must consider the relationship between
our professional and personal lives.

On the one hand, no minister can keep his own ex-
perience of life hidden from those he wants to help.
Nor should he want to keep it hidden. While a doctor
can still be a good doctor even when his private life is
severely disrupted, no minister can offer service with-
out a constant and vital acknowledgment of his own
experiences. On the other hand, it would be very easy
to misuse the concept of the wounded healer by
defending a form of spiritual exhibitionism. A minister
who talks in the pulpit about his own personal prob-
lems is of no help to his congregation, for no suffering
human being is helped by someone who tells him that
he has the same problems. Remarks such as, “Don’t
worry because I suffer from the same depression, con-
fusion and anxiety as you do,” help no one. This spirit-
ual exhibitionism adds little faith to little faith and
creates narrow-mindedness instead of new perspec-
tives. Open wounds stink and do not heal.

Making one’s own wounds a source of healing,
therefore, does not call for a sharing of superficial per-
sonal pains but for a constant willingness to see one’s
own pain and suffering as rising from the depth of the
human condition which all men share.

To some, the concept of the wounded healer might
sound morbid and unhealthy. They might feel that the
ideal of self-fulfillment is replaced by an ideal of self-
castigation, and that pain is romanticized instead of
criticized. I would like to show how the idea of the
wounded healer does not contradict the concept of self-
realization, or self-fulfillment, but deepens and broad-
ens it.

How does healing take place? Many words, such as
care and compassion, understanding and forgiveness,

88

fellowship and community, have been used for the
healing task of the Christian minister. I like to use the
word hospitality, not only because it has such deep
roots in the Judaeo-Christian tradition, but also, and
primarily, because it gives us more insight into the na-
ture of response to the human condition of loneliness.
Hospitality is the virtue which allows us to break
through the narrowness of our own fears and to open
our houses to the stranger, with the intuition that sal-
vation comes to us in the form of a tired traveler. Hos-
pitality makes anxious disciples into powerful wit-
nesses, makes suspicious owners into generous givers,
and makes closed-minded sectarians into interested
recipients of new ideas and insights.

But it has become very difficult for us today to fully
understand the implications of hospitality. Like the
Semitic nomads, we live in a desert with many lonely
travelers who are looking for a moment of peace, for a
fresh drink and for a sign of encouragement so that
they can continue their mysterious search for freedom.

What does hospitality as a healing power require? It
requires first of all that the host feel at home in his own
house, and secondly that he create a free and fearless
place for the unexpected visitor. Therefore, hospitality
embraces two concepts: concentration and community.

1. Hospitality and concentration

Hospitality is the ability to pay attention to the guest.
This is very difficult, since we are preoccupied with our
own needs, worries and tensions, which prevent us
from taking distance from ourselves in order to pay at-
tention to others.

Not long ago I met a parish priest. After describing
his hectic daily schedule—religious services, classroom

89


--- Page 7 ---
teaching, luncheon and dinner engagements, and or-
ganizational meetings—he said apologetically: “Yes
. .. but there are so many problems... .” When I
asked, “Whose problems?” he was silent for a few min-
utes, and then more or less reluctantly said, “I guess—
my own.” Indeed, his incredible activities seemed in
large part motivated by fear of what he would discover
when he came to a standstill. He actually said: “I guess
I am busy in order to avoid a painful self-concentra-
tion.”

So we find it extremely hard to pay attention because
of our intentions. As soon as our intentions take over,
the question no longer is, “Who is he?” but, “What can
I get from him?”—and then we no longer listen to
what he is saying but to what we can do with what he
is saying. Then the fulfillment of our unrecognized
need for sympathy, friendship, popularity, success, un-
derstanding, money or a career becomes our concern,
and instead of paying attention to the other person we
impose ourselves upon him with intrusive curiosity.
(See James Hillman: Insearch, Charles Scribner’s
Sons, New York, 1967, p. 18.)

Anyone who wants to pay attention without inten-
tion has to be at home in his own house—that is, he
has to discover the center of his life in his own heart.
Concentration, which leads to meditation and contem-
plation, is therefore the necessary precondition for true
hospitality. When our souls are restless, when we are
driven by thousands of different and often conflicting
stimuli, when we are always “over there” between peo-
ple, ideas and the worries of this world, how can we
possibly create the room and space where someone else
can enter freely without feeling himself an unlawful in-
truder?

90

Paradoxically, by withdrawing into ourselves, not
out of self-pity but out of humility, we create the space
for another to be himself and to come to us on his own
terms. James Hillman, director of studies at the C. G.
Jung Institute in Zurich, speaking about counseling,
writes:

For the other person to open and talk requires a
withdrawal of the counselor. I must withdraw to
make room for the other ... This withdrawal,
rather than going-out-to-meet the other, is an in-
tense act of concentration, a model for which can
be found in the Jewish mystical doctrine of Tsim-
tsum. God as omnipresent and omnipotent was ev-
erywhere. He filled the universe with his Being.
How then could the creation come about? ...
God had to create by withdrawal; He created the
not-Him, the other, by self-concentration. . . On
the human level, withdrawal of myself aids the
other to come into being. (Insearch, p. 31)

But human withdrawal is a very painful and lonely
process, because it forces us to face directly our own
condition in all its beauty as well as misery. When we
are not afraid to enter into our own center and to con-
centrate on the stirrings of our own soul, we come to
know that being alive means being loved. This experi-
ence tells us that we can only love because we are born
out of love, that we can only give because our life is a
gift, and that we can only make others free because we
are set free by Him whose heart is greater than ours.
When we have found the anchor places for our lives in
our own center, we can be free to let others enter into
the space created for them and allow them to dance
their own dance, sing their own song and speak their

91


--- Page 8 ---
own language without fear. Then our presence is no
longer threatening and demanding but inviting and
liberating.

2. Hospitality and community

The minister who has come to terms with his own
loneliness and is at home in his own house is a host
who offers hospitality to his guests. He gives them a
friendly space, where they may feel free to come and
go, to be close and distant, to rest and to play, to talk
and to be silent, to eat and to fast. The paradox indeed
is that hospitality asks for the creation of an empty
space where the guest can find his own soul.

Why is this a healing ministry? It is healing because
it takes away the false illusion that wholeness can be
given by one to another. It is healing because it does
not take away the loneliness and the pain of another,
but invites him to recognize his loneliness on a level
where it can be shared. Many people in this life suffer
because they are anxiously searching for the man or
woman, the event or encounter, which will take their
loneliness away. But when they enter a house with real
hospitality they soon see that their own wounds must
be understood not as sources of despair and bitterness,
but as signs that they have to travel on in obedience to
the calling sounds of their own wounds.

From this we get an idea of the kind of help a
minister may offer. A minister is not a doctor whose
primary task is to take away pain. Rather, he deepens
the pain to a level where it can be shared. When some-
one comes with his loneliness to the minister, he can
only expect that his loneliness will be understood and
felt, so that he no longer has to run away from it but
can accept it as an expression of his basic human con-

92

dition. When a woman suffers the loss of her child, the
minister is not called upon to comfort her by telling her
that she still has two beautiful healthy children at
home; he is challenged to help her realize that the
death of her child reveals her own mortal condition,
the same human condition which he and others share
with her.

Perhaps the main task of the minister is to prevent
people from suffering for the wrong reasons. Many peo-
ple suffer because of the false supposition on which
they have based their lives. That supposition is that
there should be no fear or loneliness, no confusion or
doubt. But these sufferings can only be dealt with crea-
tively when they are understood as wounds integral to
our human condition. Therefore ministry is a very
confronting service. It does not allow people to live
with illusions of immortality and wholeness. It keeps
reminding others that they are mortal and broken, but
also that with the recognition of this condition, libera-
tion starts.

No minister can save anyone. He can only offer him-
self as a guide to fearful people. Yet, paradoxically, it
is precisely in this guidance that the first signs of hope
become visible. This is so because a shared pain is no
longer paralyzing but mobilizing, when understood as a
way to liberation. When we become aware that we do
not have to escape our pains, but that we can mobilize
them into a common search for life, those very pains
are transformed from expressions of despair into signs
of hope.

Through this common search, hospitality becomes
community. Hospitality becomes community as it
creates a unity based on the shared confession of our
basic brokenness and on a shared hope. This hope in
turn leads us far beyond the boundaries of human

93;



--- Page 9 ---
togetherness to Him who calls His people away from
the land of slavery to the land of freedom. It belongs to
the central insight of the Judaeo-Christian tradition,
that it is the call of God which forms the people of
God.

A Christian community is therefore a healing com-
munity not because wounds are cured and pains are
alleviated, but because wounds and pains become
openings or occasions for a new vision. Mutual confes-
sion then becomes a mutual deepening of hope, and
sharing weakness becomes a reminder to one and all of
the coming strength.

When loneliness is among the chief wounds of the
minister, hospitality can convert that wound into a
source of healing. Concentration prevents the minister
from burdening others with his pain and allows him to
accept his wounds as helpful teachers of his own and
his neighbor’s condition. Community arises where the
sharing of pain takes place, not as a stifling form of
self-complaint, but as a recognition of God’s saving
promises.

CONCLUSION

I started this chapter with the story of Rabbi Joshua
ben Levi, who asked Elijah, “When will the Messiah
come?” There is an important conclusion to this story.
When Elijah had explained to him how he could find
the Messiah sitting among the poor at the gates of the
city, Rabbi Joshua ben Levi went to the Messiah and
said to him:

“Peace unto you, my master and teacher.”
The Messiah answered, “Peace unto you, son of
Levi.”

94

He asked, “When is the master coming?”

“Today,” he answered.

Rabbi Yoshua returned to Elijah, who asked,
“What did he tell you?”

“He indeed has deceived me, for he said ‘Today
I am coming’ and he has not come.”

Elijah said, “This is what he told you: ‘Today if
you would listen to His voice.’” (Psalm 95.7)

Even when we know that we are called to be
wounded healers, it is still very difficult to acknowledge
that healing has to take place today. Because we are
living in days when our wounds have become all too
visible. Our loneliness and isolation has become so
much a part of our daily experience, that we cry out
for a Liberator who will take us away from our misery
and bring us justice and peace.

To announce, however, that the Liberator is sitting
among the poor and that the wounds are signs of hope
and that today is the day of liberation, is a step very
few can take. But this is exactly the announcement of
the wounded healer: “The master is coming—not to-
morrow, but today, not next year, but this year, not
after all our misery is passed, but in the middle of it,
not in another place but right here where we are stand-
ing.”

And with a challenging confrontation he says:

O that today you would listen to his voice!
Harden not your heart as at Meribah,

as on that day at Massah in the desert
when they tried me, though they saw

my work. (Psalm 95.7-9)

If indeed we listen to the voice and believe that min-
istry is a sign of hope, because it makes visible the first

95



--- Page 10 ---
rays of light of the coming Messiah, we can make our-
selves and others understand that we already carry in
us the source of our own search. Thus ministry can in-
deed be a witness to the living truth that the wound,
which causes us to suffer now, will be revealed to us
later as the place where God intimated his new crea-
tion.

96

CONCLUSION

