--- Page 1 ---
Practical Clergy Responses
to Community, Regional
and National Tragedy
Edited by Rabbi Stephen B. Roberts, BCJC
and Rev. Willard W. C. Ashley Sr., DMIN, DH
Walking Together, Finding the Way®
SKYUGHf PATHS®
PUBLISHING
Woodstock, Vermont

--- Page 2 ---
7
Spiritual First Aid
Rev. Julie Taylor, MDiv, CTR
It is four-thirty in the morning at a respite center for rescue and re
covery personnel working at the site of an airline crash. As a group
of local firefighters end their break, leaving the respite center to re
turn to the debris field to search for human remains, a firefighter
turns to the chaplain who has just handed him a cup of coffee and
says, "Pray for me," as he walks out the door.
Spiritual first aid is a short-term helping tool designed to mitigate the
impact of the spiritual, psychological, and physical aspects of crisis
that may be experienced by a person who has been affected by disaster or
a critical incident. Spirrtual first aid does not include advocating for any
one faith or belief system, proselytizing, or imposing any beliefs or rituals;
it is providing care and comfort for people during times of great need.
Assisting others is not a new concept to people of faith. Serving
and caring for the needy is a spiritual tenet of all the major faith tradi
tions, and has been practiced for thousands of years. Looking at statis
tics that claim 97 percent of Americans believe in God and 90 percent
pray, it is not surprising that people turn to their faith or spiritual
roots when experiencing crisis or stress. According to a national
American Red Cross study from 2001, when respondents were asked
who they were most likely or very likely to seek assistance from during
crisis, 59 percent said a spiritual counselor, 45 percent said a physician,
and 40 percent said a mental health professional.1 Psychology profes
sor Dr. George S. Everly Jr., states, "It has been commonly observed
106

--- Page 3 ---
1liat i11 ti11H·s of 1.Tisis and disastt'I', 111:111y i11divid11als st•t'k 0111 rl'ligio11s
or spirit11:1I kadcrs. ".~
The l11tl'rnatio11;1I Critical Incident Stress Foundation (ICISF) has
dt'vl'loped a wonderful curriculum called Pastoral Crisis Intervention
(l'CI ), with levels 1 and II. It is my goal to expand on the PCI model,
111:1king it more accessible to a more diverse user group, beginning with
.1 change of terms and the connection between pastoral crisis interven-
1i on and spiritual first aid. There are limited models of spiritual response
I<> crisis that speak to the needs of responders participating from multi
ple faiths. Crisis interventions dealing with the spiritual response to cri
sis do not require a pastor. The title of "pastor" is specifically Christian
and connected with ordination or a call to ministry. The use of this term
i the title of a model is confusing and exdusionary, suggesting that a
11
spiritual responder must be ordained, or Christian. The term spiritual
first aid causes no such confusion or exclusivity. Anyone from any faith
1r adition, regardless of official status, can provide spiritual first aid with
proper training. As written in Appendix A of Everly's book, Pastoral
<: risis Intervention, the terms pastoral crisis intervention and spiritual
first aid are used interchangeably.3 ICISF's Pastoral Crisis Intervention
I .evel II course goes into greater detail regarding spiritual first aid.4
Spiritual first aid is not pastoral counseling or therapy; it is also
11ot a substitute for therapy. It is a crisis intervention technique used
during times of acute stress. As the name implies, it is first aid, not a
l·ure, not fixing. Physical first aid is designed to stabilize and assess an
i11jury, to provide basic care for injuries, and if stabilization attempts
:1 re not successful, to call for a higher level of care to take over. With
some physical injuries, such as a superficial cut, all that is needed is to
dean the wound and apply a bandage, allowing the body to take over
healing on its own. But with a heart attack, for example, administering
( :PR is required until paramedics arrive to transport the individual to
:1 hospital for further treatment. The same principles apply in spiritual
Ii rst aid: stabilize, assess, provide care and comfort, refer as necessary.
There is a significant difference between the long-term therapeu-
1i c process of pastoral counseling and spiritual first aid. Everly de
.~LTibes pastoral counseling as "an approach to the therapeutic process,
wherein theology and spirituality are integrated with the principles of
psychology and behavioral science to help individuals, couples, families,

--- Page 4 ---
grn1q1,,, ;111cl i11.'I ii 111 ic >11.o.; ;1~·l1i('Vl' 1111·111;il IH·:tl1'1 .111cl 111c11111 llc· wc-ll1wo.;, 11t
:ill levels."\ TIH· loc11s ol spiri111:1l lirsl :1id i.o.; tltl' line· .111cl 11c1w, wltn1·1111
the focus of pastoral counseling is die p:tst, pr1·s1·111, :11111 l11111n·." Who
is spiritual first aid for? Anyone affected hy dis:1stn or nitiL·:il i11 ·i·
dents can benefit from spiritual first aid. It can be used with adults 01•
children, survivors or family members, rescue and recovery personm·I,
relief workers, and the community at large. Who delivers spiritual first
aid? A variety of people can be trained to administer spiritual first aid1
ordained or lay clergy, faith leaders, peers, friends, even family members,
Where should spiritual first aid be administered? Venues for pro·
viding spiritual first aid could be any number of places, including, hut'
not limited to: shelters, respite centers, disaster assistance service ccn·
ters, emergency call centers or emergency operations centers, emergent:y
first aid stations, memorial services, family assistance centers, homes,
businesses, houses of worship, hospitals, combat zones, military bases,
or wherever one may be working or deployed.
When is spiritual first aid best used? Generally, spiritual first aid
is a tool for use in the immediate aftermath of a critical incident. It is
designed as a short-term helping technique that will assist stabilizing
those affected by the incident and refer them to a higher level of care if
necessary.
Why is spiritual first aid needed at all? Humans are complex cre
ations; spirituality is a Eealm of our experience that can be damaged
during times of great pain and suffering, but it can also serve as a
source of strength to draw upon during those same times. Spirituality
connects us to something greater than ourselves and helps us make
meaning of life-the good times and bad. For many people, religion
and religious practices offer a sense of security and safety. 7
During times of great stress, it is not unusual for people who have
a relationship with a higher power or faith to use the spiritual or reli
gious language from their faith tradition to express their distress. 8
"Such expressions do not necessarily indicate a crisis of faith, per se,
rather, such expression may simply be expressions of psychological dis
tress." 9 For these individuals, the presence of a trained disaster chap
lain or spiritual care provider may be of comfort.

--- Page 5 ---
Ht1sic !\dio11s t111t! ( ,'ot1/s of' S/1irilua/ /i'irsl !\id
1\ '-. d1·li1wd carlin, spiri111:il lirsl :1id is dt'signnl lo 111i1-ig:1IT i-hc illlpact
'd I hl' spi ri 111;i I nisis l' :-: peril'11cnl hy survivors, fo rnily members, rescue
.111d rl'covery pcrso1111cl, and i-he community at large in the aftermath
111 ;1 disastL·r. Hased on IClSf's pastoral crisis intervention model, there
.m· livl' hasic actions to maximize the spiritual first aid standards of
.11-e set forth by PCI Level II.
l
• Stabilization and introduction
• Acknowledgment
• Facilitating understanding
• Encouraging adaptive spiritual coping
• Referral (as needed)
Stabilization and introduction. In this action you provide a calm-
111g ministry of presence, a caring human connection. Introducing your
>l'If is the first step to stabilizing a situation. Keep in mind that in most
di.saster or crisis situations you will not have a prior relationship with
1l ie people for whom you are providing services. An introduction such
.1s, "Hi, I'm Julie. I'm a chaplain with Disaster Chaplaincy Services.
l ::111 I get you a bottle of water?" may begin to establish rapport and
,.,ivc you a chance to be of immediate service. An assessment of psycho
ll 1gical, emotional, and spiritual needs begins with making a connec-
1i on. If the person you are speaking with cannot speak or answers with
slmred speech, you may need to call for immediate medical assistance.
'I 'his opening introduction offers many opportunities to assist in crisis.
Acknowledgment. This action involves attentive and active listen
i 11g to a person in crisis. If the person you are speaking with chooses to
"Pl'ak about his or her experience-what happened or what is going
• 111 right now-listen. The use of reflective responses during this time
.. ignals recognition of this person's experience. For example, you could
·::1y, "It sounds like it was a complete shock," or "I see your hands are
"'ill shaking and hear that this was a terrifying situation for you."
l'IL'ase note that it is not advised to encourage a person to "tell their
story" if they do not want to. For some people, telling their story can
1·xacerbate the stress response. The goal of spiritual first aid is not to
l'.t't to the bottom of the trauma or crisis, but to mitigate the effects of
t lic crisis and refer an individual on to greater care if needed.

--- Page 6 ---
Fncilitntin~ undcrstnndin~. This :11.:tion involvl's v:ilid:lti11g tht' t'X•
pcric11cL· :111d providi11g i11for111:11 ion. Providing i11forn1:11 ion 011 coll1•
nu
mon stress reactions can he! p i-o v:1I ida tl' die crisis rcac1·ions :i
emotions an individual may be experiencing. During highly stressful
times, most people don't understand the psychological, emotional, :111d
spiritual responses they or their loved ones may be feeling. All they
know is that they or their loved ones aren't themselves and they don 'c
like it. Part of providing spiritual first aid is having an understanding
of typical stress reactions and being able to offer basic education mate·
rials (a pamphlet or other handout) on stress. A person's distress will
often lessen once they understand the common reactions to uncomrnon
situations and that they or their loved ones are not going crazy. This
understanding can be particularly helpful for adult caretakers of chil
dren. Children often exhibit specific reactions that, while "normal,'
can be upsetting to adult caretakers.
Encouraging adaptive spiritual coping. In this action you promote
positive coping skills and strategies, building on what works for the in
dividual. Based on what you have heard through active listening, a
spiritual first aid provider can identify some coping strategies the indi
vidual is utilizing to help get him or her through the crisis. Support the
person by examining what skills he or she has tried in the past and
what skills he or she is using now to get through this difficult time.
Highlight the positive strategies the individual has used (such as exer
cising or talking with f~iends) and encourage that person to continue
doing these things. Some coping mechanisms may feel like they are re
ducing stress but can actually have negative ramifications in the long
run (such as increased alcohol consumption or isolation from loved
ones or from work). For many people, faith and their religious tradi
tions are strong coping mechanisms. If praying with a person or facili
tating rituals are appropriate, this can be a powerful tool for both
short- and long-term healing and resilience. As a spiritual first aid
provider, you can create a safe space for an individual to connect to his
or her faith, whether you are of that person's faith tradition or not. If
there is a request for a ritual that is not of your faith, find someone on
site who can assist in providing the ritual, or make an immediate refer
ral to someone who can.
Referral. In this action you provide a bridge to resources. While
working disasters, referrals can come in many types and contexts.

--- Page 7 ---
Tlwrt· 111:1y lw 1i111l's wht·11 :111 i111111l'lli:llt' f'l'krr:1I to :111 i11tl'rn:1I systl'lll
f'l'qt1ired (if you Wl'l't' worki11g in :1 disaster assistancl' service center
I!'.
.111d speaking with a client who needs temporary housing, you may
lll'l'd to make an immediate referral to the American Red Cross or
Salvation Army desk). There are also times while listening to someone
1'1:1t it becomes clear that they need immediate mental health assis
t :11H.:e (such as anyone exhibiting suicidal ideation). Connecting people
to d1eir existing social supports is very important. Disaster chaplains
:111d spiritual first aid providers, by definition, are not there for the
long haul; you are there to provide immediate assistance. Therefore, it
is important to get people connected to whatever resources they might
need. Based on the needs presented, you may refer individuals to a fu
lll'ral director, financial planner, mental health provider, grief support
group, the Department of Motor Vehicles, or a licensed general con
tractor. The list is endless. A general rule in referrals is if you feel that
you are in over your head, you probably are.
Attitudes in Action
( :ome to the situation with a prayerful heart: you are there to serve. I
believe this to be one of the most important attitudes regarding spiri
t·ual first aid. No matter your official title at a disaster site, your role is
1·0 be of service to those who have been affected. There is no room for
divas at a disaster. Be helpfuL "Get the GET out."10 GET stands for
greed, ego, and turf; three things that inhibit disaster response.
"Handing someone a bottle of water as a spiritual response?
Anyone can do that. I'm a trained professional; I'm here to help people
with spiritual crisis." If a person on my team made that statement, it
would be their last deployment with us. Check your ego at the door.
As an ambassador of the Sacred, handing a thirsty person a bottle of
water is a spiritual response. You represent something larger than
yourself and all the letters that go before or after your name.
If you go into disaster or crisis work wanting to fix or believing
you can fix, you will not only be unhelpful to the people you have
gone to help, but you create a no-win situation for yourself. If a person
says they don't want to talk or that they don't want to talk with you,
leave them alone. Unless they are having a reaction that requires med
ical attention, it is unethical to continue to intervene.

--- Page 8 ---
R;1hhi ,lonn1·lrn11 Sinter, 1:hnplnin llw lrndt.·rship for
:i 011 ll':1111
Disaster Chapl.ii1H.:y Scrviecs, New York, dl'scrihl's 1hc :ll'ri1udc of ll
disaster chaplain as "carrying a prayerful heart into the work. Even
when we are not praying with someone else out loud, tbe attitude we
bring, the orientation we bring into that work, is a prayerful one."
Patricia arrives at her parents' house for a visit and finds her mother
is out grocery shopping and her elderly father has died. The para
medics arrive on the scene, accompanied by a chaplain who has been
with them on a ride-along. The chaplain approaches Patricia and his
first question is, "Had your father accepted Jesus Christ as his Lord
and Savior?" Patricia is taken off guard and mumbles, "I guess so,"
and works to stay out of the chaplain's path until he leaves.
This story illustrates an example of the misuse of spiritual power and a
complete missed opportunity for providing spiritual first aid. Patricia
and her family would have been much better served had the chaplain's .
first words been, "I am so sorry for your loss. Is there anything I can
do for you right now? Anyone I can call?" Those simple questions
coming from a chaplain would have been a strong spiritual response to
Patricia's suffering.
When working as a disaster spiritual care provider or chaphtin,
your job is to provide care and comfort. Scripture and prayer can be
comforting to many people, but you cannot assume it will be comfort-
.,
ing during a disaster. Stress creates new priorities. I have heard from
clergy, "If I'm not praying with them, I'm not doing my job." Don't
take people hostage with your need to pray. Praying silently to yourself
is always okay (and a pretty good idea).
The most important thing is not what you say; it is that you are
present. Your presence shows that you are willing to stay and accom
pany him or her, and that you won't walk away from the pain and an
guish that comes along in life.
First Things First
A key guideline in providing spiritual first aid is "first things first."
Spiritual first aid is not unlike medical first aid in this respect. You
must stabilize a person and stop the bleeding (metaphorical and literal)
before anything else can happen. As a spiritual first aid provider, it is

--- Page 9 ---
Esteem
Needs
Self-esteem
Recognition
Status
Social Needs
Sense of belonging
Love
Safety Needs
Security
Protection
Physiological Needs
Hunger
Thirst
Figure 7.1
l'ssential to note that taking care of first things first is part of the over
:i 11 spiritual response to critical incidents, emergencies, and disasters.
In 1943, Abraham Maslow published an important paper, "A
Theory of Human Motivation," in which he described a ladder of
hasic human needs arranged in a hierarchy of pre-potency that informs
;111d motivates behavior. There are five classifications in Maslow's
"Hierarchy of Needs" (see figure 7.1). The theory states that we must
satisfy each layer of need in turn, starting with the level of survival.
For the man who is extremely and dangerously hungry, no other
interests exist but food. [A] peculiar characteristic of the human
organism when it is dominated by a certain need is that the whole
philosophy of the future tends also to change. For a chronically
hungry man ... life itself tends to be defined in terms of eating.
Anything else will be defined as unimportant. Freedom, love, com
munity feeling, respect, philosophy, may all be waved aside as frip
peries which are useless since they fail to fill the stomach." 11

--- Page 10 ---
Wlw11 till' lowt'r lt•vt·I of lll'l'ds is s11l iNli1·d, tl11· lll'XI il'vl·I l'llll'l'J.!,l'S. 'I(> n
i11111p to :1 liiglin lcvl·I without th\' h11st• ol tl1t· pyra111id i11 pl:1n· is to in- \l
vill' :1 hl:111k stal'l' at· hl'st, :1 hostiit' i11tl'l':ll"ti<>11 :it worst. Morl' th:111 onl' k
hundred years ago, Upton Sinclair wrotl' '/'/Jc Jungle. Thl' following V'
passage describes an attempt by clergy to help, but whose assistance is
focused on a level of needs much higher than their listeners are able to
approach:
The evangelist was preaching "sin and redemption," the infinite
grace of God and His pardon for human frailty. He was very much
in earnest, and he meant well, but Jurgis, as he listened, found his
soul filled with hatred. What did he know about sin and suffer
ing-with his smooth, black coat and his neatly starched collar, his
body warm, and his belly full, and money in his pocket-lecturing
men who were struggling for their lives, men at the death grapple
with the demon powers of hunger and cold!-This, of course, was
unfair; but Jurgis felt that these men were out of touch with the
life they discussed; they had a hall, and a fire, and food and cloth
ing and money, and so they might preach to hungry men, and the
hungry men must be humble and listen! They were trying to save
their souls-and who but a fool could fail to see that all that was
the matter with their souls was that they had not been able to get
a decent existence for their bodies?12
Maslow cites religion as a 'mechanism that can help satisfy the need for
safety for some people; for others it falls into the higher-need cate
gories. Either way, it is not a part of the base of the pyramid. The need
for food, water, and sleep supersede the need for spiritual contempla
tion. Many of the people you will work with will not have the luxury
of contemplating the Sacred while in the midst of crisis; they have to
determine how to survive the next day or week or five minutes. We can
hold that sacred space, all the while taking care of the most basic phys
iological needs first.
Cultural Issues
Culture is more than just race and religion. Age, gender, neighborhoods,
occupation, sexual orientation, and education are all examples of dis
tinct cultures. Learn about the cultures you are likely to be responding to

--- Page 11 ---
Ill' wiil1, :111d n·11H·111'wr, y1111r 111m1 i111por1:1111 11101 :1s :1 .spiri111:d firsl :1id
providl'I' is :1 q11l'sli1111-- do11't hl' :1i'r:1id to tl.•d'. 1>011'1 :1ss11111l'; you lll'Vl'I"
know who is i11 frrn11 of yrn1. A cross ;1ro1111d 1hc 11cck docs not 1·cll you
wha1· branch of ( :hristi;111i1·y a pcrson may belong to, or even if it is prac-
1i u:d. Black skin does not equal African-American.
Some cultures (including many in the United States) do not see
women as spiritual leaders. I wear a clerical collar when I respond to
disasters. While working at Ground Zero after 9111, more than once a
firefighter or police officer would see the collar and immediately say,
"Hello, Fadda" (that's New York for Father), then really look at me
and stutter, "Fadda, uh ... Sister, what are you?" The majority of first
responders in New York City are Roman Catholic men; they were not
accustomed to seeing a woman wearing a collar. Most of the time this
humorous moment opened up a conversation, but some were offended
at my "pretending" to be a priest. A time of crisis is not the time to get
into arguments regarding denominational or theological differences of
opinion or practice. In these instances, the best action I could take was
to refer them to a Catholic priest I was working with.
Culture can be more powerful than religion. A light-haired, blue
eyed clergyperson went to an island in the West Indies to help after a
hurricane. He was of the same religion as most of the people he was
working with, but no one would speak with him. He eventually asked
an elder in the community if he had somehow offended the people.
The elder replied, "You have blue eyes. People who have blue eyes
have no soul."
It is possible to work with an open heart and still find that some
people will not want your help. You cannot take people's reactions to
you personally. As a spiritual first aid provider, your job is to be of
service; if for whatever reason you cannot be of service, it is your re
sponsibility to refer a person to someone who can. Don't take it per
sonally, it is about helping them, helping them where they are.
Pre-incident Education: Get Prepared,
Get Training, Get Connected
"Disaster preparedness" is a phrase that has become prominent in our
vocabulary over the last several years. But how many of us actually are
prepared? If you do not have a disaster plan and supplies in your home

--- Page 12 ---
116 Taylor
and workplace, you will have a very difficult time responding to other
people's needs and cries of distress. Personal preparedness is one of the
responsibilities of the spiritual care provider. The American Red Cross
and the federal government have excellent resources to assist with dis
aster preparedness. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has
online training courses in the incident command system and how it
works during disaster. These resources are free. Once you have your
disaster plans in order (for your home and place of business), practice.
The perfect plan will do no good in a crisis if it has sat quietly i~ a
drawer, unrehearsed. Do not overlook CPR and first aid classes not
only for disaster preparedness, but preparedness for the crises that can
and do happen every day.
Get trained in spiritual first aid and other related interventions.
Reading a chapter or even a book on the subject is not equivalent to
training. Disaster Chaplaincy Services and the International Critical
Incident Stress Foundation have courses designed to train individuals in
terested in this field. Clinical pastoral education (CPE) is not necessarily
the same as crisis intervention training. If you have CPE units, they will
likely help you adapt to disaster work, but even working in the most
chaotic emergency room environment is different from working at a shel
ter right after a hurricane or at a disaster morgue. Neither one is better
than the other; they are-distinct and complementary skill sets. Continuing
education and then regular practice of these skills is imperative.
Get connected to your local response organizations. A "lone
wolf" showing up at the site of a disaster or crisis is generally not wel
come. Find out if there are existing Community Emergency Responsl'
Teams in your area or get connected to your local American Red Cross
chapter. There may be a network of multifaith spiritual care providers
already working in your area. If not, perhaps it is time to create onl'.
Contact Disaster Chaplaincy Services for information on how to begin
that process. See chapter 3 for more about disaster preparedness.
Final Words
Crises, emergencies, and disasters are ;111 inevit·ahk, t111fort1111;1t-L' n·;di
til's of our wnrld, ht11 liil'l'l' arl' w;1ys 1-0 help pL'opll' tlir011gli tlil'sl' try
i11g tilll('S. Spiri1l1;d lirsl ;1id is ;1 v;1l11ahk toul 10 ;1dd to yom rqwrtoirr.
It v;111 lw i11n!'dilily dillil 1111 )'l't i11nl'dilily n·w;1rdi11g wnrk.

--- Page 13 ---
Spiritual First Aid 117
Reflecting back on the firefighter from the opening vignette, after
being given time to rest and a cup of coffee, he is ready for a prayer.
With the base of the pyramid stabilized, the next level can be explored.
The presence of a trained spiritual first aid provider brings the oppor
l unity for another level of stabilization during a time of great need.
C; et trained, get prepared, get connected.
Notes
l. American Red Cross national poll, October 5-8, 2001, by Caravan ORC Int.
1,000 adults over the age of eighteen living in private homes; +/- 3 percent; release
date: Occitber 16, 2001.
.!.. G.S. Everly, Jr., "The Role of Pastoral Crisis Intervention in Disasters, Terrorism,
Violence, and Other Community Crises," International Journal of Emergency
Mental Health, 2, no. 3 (2000): 139-42.
\. G.S. Everly, Jr., Pastoral Crisis Intervention (Ellicott City, MD: Chevron, 2007).
·I. G.S. Everly, Jr., et al., Pastoral Crisis Intervention-II Course Workbook (Ellicott
City, MD: International Critical Incident Stress Foundation, 2005).
\. Everly, Pastoral Crisis Intervention (Ellicott City, MD: Chevron, 2007).
Ii. l·'.verly, et al., Pastoral Crisis Intervention Course Workbook (Ellicott City, MD:
2002).
1. !\.Maslow, "A Theory of Human Motivation," Psychological Review, 50 (1943):
.F0-96.
s. T Webb, "Crisis of Faith vs. Spiritual Cry of Distress," International Journal of
l•:mergency Mental Health, 6, no. 4 (2004): 217-22.
''· F.vcrly, et al., Pastoral Crisis Intervention-II Course Workbook.
111. The author heard this phrase from Diane Myers, the original origin is unknown.
I I. /\. Maslow, "A Theory of Human Motivation," 370-96.
I '. l I. Sinclair, The Jungle. (New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003).
Further Reading
I 11·ilv, < ;_ S., Jr. Pastoral Crisis Intervention. Ellicott City, MD: Chevron, 2007.
I 1 "1h " < ;. S., Jr. "Pastoral Crisis Intervention: A Word of Caution," International
/"11m,i/ u/ Emergency Mental Health 6, no. 4 (2004): 211-16.
I 1 • 111, < ;. S., Jr. "The Role of Pastoral Crisis Intervention in Disasters, Terrorism,
\!1< iil'lll'l', ,,.; ,1 ,1 ,1 ,d f, Other Community Crises," International Journal of Emergency
f\11'11/,tf, !., 110 ..\ (!.000): 1.V:>-42.
I l.il1 .. ·111, .I .. :111d M. Tr;11110111i11. l>is.ist1·r Ml'11tal Health: Theory & Practice. Belmont,
< 1\: Th11111s1111, llrrn1k.,/< :.,1,., .',110'/.
lll.1 .. l11w, /\. "(\ '1'111·1111· cil 1111111.111 l\l1111v;1li1111," l'.')'c"!w/ugit·a/ lfr11iew SO (1943):
I '() 1>11. l111p://p.,l'I 111 l.1•,•.i1 •1,1·111 l<11.1 .1/l\l.1'.l••w/111111iv;11in11.l11111.

--- Page 14 ---
118 Taylor
McPherson, K. F. "Pastoral Crisis Intervention with Children: Recognizing and
Responding to the Spiritual Reaction of Children," International Journal of
Emergency Mental Health 6, no. 4 (2004): 223-31.
Myers, D., and D. Wee. Disaster Mental Health Services. New York: Brunner
Routledge, 2005.
Paget, N .. K., and McCormack,]. R. The Work of the Chaplain. Valley Forge, PA:
Judson Press, 2006.
Sinclair, U. The Jungle. Rev. ed. (New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003).
Webb, T. E. "Crisis of Faith vs. Spiritual Cry of Distress," International Journal of
Emergency Mental Health 6, no. 4 (2004): 217-22.
Resources
International Critical Incident Stress Foundation: www.icisf.org.
Disaster Chaplaincy Services: www.disasterchaplaincy.org.
FEMA-Incident Command System: http://training.fema.govNCNew/firstVC.asp.
Disaster Preparedness: American Red Cross, www.redcross.org; U.S. Government,
www.ready.gov and http://www.citizencorps.gov/.
Acknowledgments
The contributor wishes to acknowledge the following people for their
expertise, wisdom, experience, and guidance in writing this chapter:
Marge Doherty, Derrick McQueen, Diane Myers, Diane Ryan, Rebecca
Smith, Pete Volkmann,,and Tom Webb.
About the Contributor
Rev. Julie Taylor, MDiv, CTR, (Certified Trauma Responder), is the'
executive director of Disaster Chaplaincy Services, New York. She is
member of both the International Critical Incident Stress Foundation
(ICISF) and the Association of Traumatic Stress Specialists, and is an
ICISF-approved instructor. Rev. Taylor has been a consultant to th
New York City Mayor's Office of Labor Relations on trauma-related
crisis counseling and psychoeducation. During the 9/11 recovery, Rev,
Taylor was a chaplain at St. Paul's Chapel at the World Trade Center
site. Rev. Taylor serves on the Hudson Valley Critical Incident Stre
Management Team and is the cofounder of Chiron Associates.

--- Page 15 ---
Other Professional Resources from SkyLight Paths
How to Be a Perfect Stranger
The Essential Religious Etiquette Handbook
Edited by Stuart M. Mat/ins and Arthur]. Magida
The Perfect Stranger's Guide to
Funerals and Grieving Practices
A Guide to Etiquette in Other People's Religious Ceremonies
Edited by Stuart M. Matlins
Interactive Faith
The Essential Interreligious Community-Building Handbook
Edited by Rev. Bud Heckman with Rori Picker Neiss