FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook For the LGBT spiritual leader who is “closeted,” that is, not public about his/her sexual orientation or gender identity, issues of self-care and health are exacerbated. If one’s professional standing as clergy or spiritual teacher is possibly jeopardized by being out of the closet, how does one sustain healthy social relationships and sense of self? It is possible but not easy. Whether able to be “out” or not, the oppression of homophobia and heterosexism impacts anyone who is LGBT every day. This fact does not suggest that LGBT spiritual leaders be afforded special ethics. Rather it simply heightens the need for having solid support systems in place to help manage the complexities. For the LGBT spiritual leader who is comfortably “out” and supported by her/his religious community, issues of self- disclosure and good boundaries still apply. This is a problem for every clergy or spiritual leader. It’s just a variation on the theme for LGBT folks. For example, it may be important for a religious leader to share his/her coming-out story with congregants in order to build trust. Sexuality issues brought by a congregant in pastoral care need to be addressed openly and honestly without sexualizing the conversation to meet our own needs. This is particularly challenging with young people. They need a safe place to explore their sexual feelings, questions, and confusion, trusting that the adult clergy or spiritual leader will not take advantage of their vulnerability and cross sexual boundaries. In other words, we need to create non-sexualized settings in which sexual issues can be discussed. We also must consider the context of social meanings and the overlay of cultural particularity, especially in regard to touch boundaries. Do we deal with affection differently based on the sexual orientation of the congregant or student? What about an individual whose cultural background is more affectionate or less affectionate than our own? How can we be aware of avoiding misunderstanding at the same time that we don’t let homophobia set the agenda? These are the challenges all clergy and spiritual teachers face in our work. Generally speaking, it is wise to be more reserved than not—regardless of orientation or gender—yet, as much as possible, accommodating to the congregant’s or student’s comfort zone. At the same time we need to stay within our own comfort zone. The clergy or spiritual teacher has his/her own boundaries to deal with in terms of the affection or come-ons of congregants or students. A single person should not be regarded as “available” to the congregation or as in need of “match making” by well-meaning congregants. Privacy in one’s social life is a legitimate expectation. The keys to healthy boundaries are awareness and intention. We should never rationalize that “this time is different” or that “we are different” and the rules don’t apply. Being aware of the risks involved in any dual relationship means that we can successfully manage boundaries in ways that meet the needs of the person who asks for our help without taking advantage of his/her vulnerabilities. Our awareness and our intentions to respect boundaries can both be supported by consultation with trusted colleagues who can help us see our blind spots and potential for self-deceit. Such individuals and groups can help us remain accountable as we navigate the often confusing waters of ministry and teaching. 88 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org SUggESTEd REAdiNgS Cooper, Beth A. Under the Stained Glass Ceiling. San Diego, CA: Frontrowliving Press, 2011. Doehring, Carrie. Taking Care: Monitoring Power Dynamics and Relational Boundaries in Pastoral Care and Counseling. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 1995. Edelstein, Scott. Sex and the Spiritual Teacher. Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2010. Fortune, Marie. Is Nothing Sacred? Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1989. Fortune, Marie and James N. Poling. Sexual Abuse by Clergy. Decatur, GA: Journal of Pastoral Care Publications, 1994. Friber, Nils C. and Mark R. Laaser. Before the Fall: Preventing Pastoral Sexual Abuse. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1998. Grenz, Stanley J., & Bell, Roy D. Betrayal of Trust: Confronting and Preventing Clergy Sexual Misconduct (2nd edition). Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2001. [First edition was entitled Betrayal of Trust: Sexual Misconduct in the Pastorate and published by Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1995.] Gula, Richard M. Just Ministry: Professional Ethics for Pastoral Ministers. Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2010. Irons, Richard, & Schneider, Jennifer P. The Wounded Healer: Addiction-Sensitive Approach to the Sexually Exploitative Professional. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc., 1999. Jones, Kirk Byron. Rest in the Storm: Self-Care Strategies for Clergy and Other Caregivers. Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press, 2001. Lebacqz, Karen and Joseph D. Driskill. Ethics and Spiritual Care. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2000. Peterson, Marilyn. At Personal Risk: Boundary Violations in Professional-Client Relationships. New York, NY: Norton, 1992. Poling, James Newton. The Abuse of Power: A Theological Problem. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 1991. Ragsdale, Katherine Hancock, ed. Boundary Wars: Intimacy and Distance in Healing Relationships. Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1996. Rutter, Peter. Sex, Power, and Boundaries: Understanding and Preventing Sexual Harassment. New York, NY: Bantam, 1996. Senauke, Alan, ed. Safe Harbor: Guidelines, Process and Resources for Ethics and Right Conduct in Buddhist Communities. Berkeley, CA: Buddhist Peace Fellowship, 1998. 89 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook NOTES