Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org • You will learn about yourself and, God willing, you will work on your salvation. These are the perks of the job, however, not its purpose. • You will find people who adore you and will follow you anywhere. Don’t let them. It’s not good for them or for you. • You may have a sense of your call that takes you outside the lines of traditional ministry. I certainly did. But you need to be in relationships of accountability with your church and your colleagues. We don’t need lone rangers. Find the team players who can support and challenge you in your particular ministry. • And you certainly deserve to find a loving partner with whom you can share your life. Just don’t expect your congregants, students, etc., to fill that role. This is the paradox: Your ministry is not about you—and it is all about you. People trust us. They think we know what we are talking about! This is probably the scariest part of ministry. This is why we should always speak with some degree of fear and trembling. Somebody might just be listening! We are invited into the intimacy of others’ lives: birth, death, and everything in between. We are there with them, yet it is not our experience. We have the opportunity to play a role in their lives that makes all the difference. An old retired priest once said to me, “I do what I can and then I hurry along.” And this is an enormously satisfying experience for us. To be able to bring a word, a gesture, an idea that is healing, empowering, transforming, compassionate. But it is not our experience still. “I do what I can and then I hurry along.” It seems that this was Jesus’ ministry also. Ministry is by definition itinerant— and not just for the United Methodists. Now this doesn’t mean that we don’t plant ourselves somewhere, make a commitment to a group of people, hang in there through the good times and bad. And it doesn’t mean that we don’t benefit enormously from these relationships—even though they are transient. I simply mean that we must stay clear: this is not about us. If we forget who we are and why we are there, we can cause enormous harm. If we seek to meet our own personal needs in ministry, we can cause enormous harm. This is not about you. Here’s the other side of this caution. When your folks start to act crazy with you, don’t take it personally. This also is not about you! Remember that you represent a lot of things to people—some of them flattering, some not so flattering. Their past experiences with clergy, with men/women. Whatever. Their interactions with you are not necessarily about you! Now all of this may get confusing and you may begin to feel frustrated and powerless at times. In her novel, Robber Bride, Margaret Atwood describes the experience of a character who is a college professor: She unlocks her office door, then locks it behind her to disguise the fact that she’s in there. It’s not her office hours but the students take advantage. They can smell her out, like sniffer dogs; they’ll seize any opportunity to suck up to her or whine, or attempt to impress her, or foist upon her their versions of sulky defiance. I’m just a human being, [she] wants to say to them. But of course she isn’t. She’s a human being with power. There isn’t much of it, but it’s power all the same.3 3 Margaret Atwood, The Robber Bride (New York: Bantam Books, 1993) 24. 73 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook I find in listening to women and men in ministry talk about power, both seek to deny the power they have. Men say they don’t “feel” powerful, which means they don’t feel in control. Women say they don’t want power because power is a bad thing. Both are being unrealistic. We all have power primarily by virtue of our roles. Most of you will complete your degrees in seminary in order to complete your credentials for ministry, ordained or otherwise. These credentials give you access to institutions, communities, and people’s lives. Whether you like it or not, believe in it or not. You have power and authority because of these credentials. What you do with this resource is your choice. When I was in seminary, I studied with Henry Nouwen. This was about the time that Henry was teaching about the “wounded healer.” He helped us understand that it is not our perfection that we bring to ministry but our brokenness. It was an important contribution to our understanding of ministry. But today we must go further. We must realize that woundedness doth not a healer make. Woundedness (and there is plenty to go around) does not in and of itself make an effective minister. An effective ministry requires some healing of our wounds. In other words, VICTIM ≠ HEALER. Rather, SURIVOR = HEALER. Judith Herman describes this point in the healing process in her excellent book, Trauma and Recovery. It means belonging to a society, having a public role, being part of that which is universal. It means having a feeling of familiarity, of being known, of communion. It means taking part in the customary, the commonplace, the ordinary, and the everyday. It also carries with it a feeling of smallness, of insignificance, a sense that one’s own troubles are ‘as a drop of rain in the sea.’ The survivor who has achieved commonality with others can rest from her labors. Her recovery is accomplished; all that remains before her is her life.4 She is describing the process of integration—bringing experience and learning gained through healing to our efforts to be a healer for others. So what does it take to have a healthy ministry? I hesitate to try to prescribe, and I do not pretend to be definitive here. But I will offer some of the things I have learned as I have navigated ministry over the years. 1. Get a life. If you have one already, protect it. If you don’t, get one. In other words, have a life in addition to your ministry: physically, emotionally, intellectually; family and friends who are not part of your ministry setting; a hobby; exercise; days off; a vacation. I walk my dog twice a day. I get a massage every week. I go to baseball games and women’s basketball games. Most of my friends are unrelated to the church. I work in my yard and spend real time with my family. Have a life in addition to ministry. 2. Find colleagues for study and support. And meet with them regularly. It is very easy to get isolated in ministry. Don’t wait for someone else to do this for you. Find those people with whom you can consult and take your questions and struggles there. Make sure that you include some people you can count on to challenge you as well as support you. 3. When I went away to college, my mother said to me: “Remember who you are and what you represent.” In order to remember who we are, we must know who we are. Take the time to reflect on who you are: what is your social location and what does it mean? I hope your time in seminary is helping you do this. If because of your accident of birth you have privilege and 4 Judith Herman, Trauma and Recovery (New York: Basic Books, 1992) 236. 74 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org access to resources, how do you use these resources to empower others and challenge injustice? What is your personal and familial history? If you recall being abused as a child or growing up in a dysfunctional family, how have you worked on those wounds to find healing for yourself? What are the stresses in your life now, and how do you manage them so that they don’t put you at risk to do harm to someone else? “Remember who you are and what you represent.” At this time in history, some of us do represent particular realities and communities. Whether as people of color or women, as gays and lesbians or persons with disabilities, whether we like it or not, we do represent our particular communities. And we have the potential to bring leadership where it is sorely needed. “Remember who you are and what you represent.” And remember who your people are. Who are those who have gone before you, who have carried you, taught you, guided you, cried with you, laughed with you. These are the people that Paul is lifting up in 2 Timothy: “I am reminded of your sincere faith, a faith that lived first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and now, I am sure, lives in you.”5 They are the cloud of witnesses who go before us. Name them for yourself. “Remember who you are and what you represent.” 4. Discover the joy of boundaries. When we have “the boundary discussion,” I always worry about the heavy negative connotation that some people feel towards boundaries in relationships. I find that boundaries are a great gift, both personally and professionally. I am not talking about building walls. Rather about boundaries that give shape to relationships and help to build trust; they are built on respect for the other person. So when you consider pushing the boundaries in relation to a congregant or client, I encourage you to consider three things: 1. What is the likely impact on or potential harm to the individual congregant? How will he/she be affected by relaxing these boundaries, by increasing the mutual intimacy of our relationship? Are you attempting to meet your needs at his/her expense? What about her/his family? And what about yours? 2. What is the likely impact on or potential harm to the congregation itself? How will others react? Will this appear to be some kind of favoritism? Will it stimulate jealousy or dissension? Will others expect the same degree of mutual intimacy with you? 3. What is the likely impact on or potential harm to the mission of the church? Will your actions undermine the common mission you share? Will others be distracted from their ministries by your actions? We must consider each of these questions because our choices and actions regarding ministerial boundaries affect much more than just ourselves and the other person involved. If our mission as a faith community is to sustain ourselves so that we might be able to carry our efforts forth to make justice and bring healing, if we believe that our faith communities should embody the values of justice, protection of the vulnerable and shared power, and if we affirm the need for persons called forth from among us to sustain, teach and lead, then we need leaders committed to clear boundaries and a willingness to be accountable for their actions. Good boundaries make effective ministry possible; effective ministry sustains the faith community and carries forth its message and witness. 5. ‘Let go, but stand by.’ More wisdom from Frances Willard, reflecting in middle age on her experience of learning to ride a bicycle. “ ‘Let go, but stand by’—this is the golden rule for parent and pastor, teacher and friend; the only rule that at once respects the individuality of another and yet adds one’s 5 2 Tim. 1:5 NRSV. 75 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook own, so far as may be, to another’s momentum in the struggle of life.”6 Picture this 53-year-old woman in a long skirt sitting on a bicycle, and picture her teacher/supporter with a soft hand at the back of her bicycle seat, giving balance and a little push. “Let go, but stand by.” 6. Lighten up. Don’t take yourself so seriously. After all, this is not about you. This is about God’s work. We may plant the seeds, water the garden, and even harvest on occasion. We may bring the yeast and the salt; we may pass along the light; we may even taste the bread and the cup on occasion. But we are contributing to a foundation for a future which we will not see. God is at work in ways we may never comprehend. 7. Take yourselves very seriously. Ministry is a privilege and a public trust. What we do matters a great deal because people should be able to trust us. As the writer of Hebrews reminds us, “One does not presume to take this honor, but takes it only when called by God, just as Aaron [and Miriam were].”7 If you are called by God and by the community of faith, you are fortunate to bear the yoke that Jesus promises is easy to bear. 8. Finally, pray always and do not lose heart. This is Jesus’ teaching in chapter 18 of Luke’s Gospel, which he illustrates with the parable about the persistent widow who goes back time and again to the unjust judge to seek vindication. To pray always and not lose heart doesn’t mean that we should spend all our time on our knees with our hands neatly folded. Rather that we should persist in our communication with God—asking for what we need and being thankful for what we have. I hope these suggestions can help bring balance, self-discipline, and satisfaction in your ministry. I offer all of this in a context of challenge and possibility. As you pursue your vocation at this moment in history, you will encounter: • The fruits of postmodernism and cynicism eating away at our collective soul; • Political apathy in the midst of economic good times for some, despair for others; • A resurgence of hate crimes and the isms which fuel the hatred; • Violence still targeting those most vulnerable among us; • Turmoil and confusion in our churches still struggling with sexuality and missing opportunities for ministry; • A leadership vacuum desperate for strong, grounded, faithful leaders; • And a longing among our people for spiritual and ethical guidance. So be sustained by Paul’s words to Timothy: “For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but rather a spirit of power and of love and of self-discipline.”8 And be assured by the Prophet Jeremiah: “Keep your voice from weeping, and your eyes from tears; for there is a reward for your work... there is hope for your future... your children shall come back to their own country.”9 We need your leadership. We need your energy. We need your courage. We need your creativity. We need you in the big leagues. My prayer for you is that the spirit of God living within and among us will instruct you, will inspire you, will carry you, and will richly bless your ministry among us. 6 Willard, How I Learned to Ride the Bicycle, 61. 7 Heb. 5:4 NRSV. 8 2 Tim. 1:7 NRSV. 9 Jeremiah 31:16-17 NRSV. 76 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org BOUNdARy BASiCS FOR CLERgy ANd SPiRiTUAL TEAChERS To serve in the role of spiritual leader is a sacred trust. Sometimes, without intending to, we exploit and hurt those we want to teach and nurture by inappropriately crossing boundaries. What every spiritual leader needs to know about relational boundaries1 • They help us maintain clear professional relationships. • They are guidelines (usually unwritten) that help us know when and when not to participate in a given activity, especially if we have more power. • They are not intended to shackle us but to free us in our work as spiritual leaders. • They help us keep perspective when people’s problems seem overwhelming. • They signal to others that it is safe to trust us. • They protest congregants/students from our abuse of power. Our power is derived from our education, our position as a spiritual leader, and our resources. The very act of ordination sets us apart as having more power and designates us for leadership. What boundaries are NOT • They are NOT clear rules about where and when we can be friendly. • They are NOT blocks to authenticity and friendliness. how can we keep from violating boundaries inappropriately? • Be aware of our needs and find healthful ways of having them met other than by the people we are supposed to be serving. • Ask ourselves these questions: “Is this in the best interests of the other person or does it only satisfy my needs?” “Would I be comfortable if all my acquaintances knew I was doing this?” • Establish a system of accountability. That is, we should arrange to meet regularly with a spiritual director, teacher, or colleague with whom we can speak honestly. • Understand that boundaries are not always easy to discern and that there are often no clear guidelines for the best action to take when confronted with an issue. 1 Those not mentioned in the DVD are adapted from Rev. John Heagle’s “Priestly Ministry and Healthy Boundaries,” Priestly Relationships: Freedom Through Boundaries. (Chicago: The National Organization for Continuing Education of Roman Catholic Clergy, Inc., 1997). Used with permission. 77 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook dATiNg, FRiENdS, dUAL RELATiONShiPS, giFTS dating Pastors/Rabbis/Teachers who are single must often decide whether to date someone in their congregation/sangha. It is, after all, a place to meet someone with similar values and commitments. To date a congregant, however, introduces myriad complications and opportunities for misunderstandings. If you find yourself attracted to a member of your congregation/sangha, consider doing the following: • Inform him/her that you cannot be his/her spiritual leader and have a romantic involvement. Therefore, if the person wants to pursue a dating relationship, he/she should find someone else to serve as spiritual leader. • Tell your governing body and supervisor about the relationship. Friends Choosing friends from among those one serves and leads also has complications. There is a difference between being friendly and being a close friend who shares confidences. It is better to find friends among colleagues and through organizations that promote your values and interests. However, if you develop a close friendship with a congregant, consider the following: • Discuss the difficulties of being both spiritual leader and friend; • Avoid discussing the business of the congregation/sangha with him/her; • Avoid spending time together at congregational/sangha events. dual Relationships Dual relationships are those in which the spiritual leader has more than one role, for example, if the rabbi is also a client or patient of a congregant. However, if the best person for a specific responsibility is in your congregation/sangha and you choose a dual relationship, consider the following: • Minimize the number of dual relationships; • Have a clear understanding with the person involved about what is expected, a contract perhaps; • If problems develop, seek a solution with the help of your bishop/supervisor. gifts Where is the line between what is appropriate to accept and what is not appropriate? When presented with gifts, consider the following: • Let your common sense guide you; • Be certain you are not expected to do something in return; • Accept appropriate gifts with a heart-felt thank you; • Set a dollar limit; (for Buddhist teachers in traditions where dana from students is an accepted form of ongoing financial support, be careful not to develop preferences for students offering larger gifts); • Find a way to graciously decline gifts that are inappropriate. 78 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org ThE PULPiT, TRANSFERENCE, hUggiNg ANd TOUCh, iNTiMACy A respect for boundaries protects relationships in which one individual has more power than the other. Four areas in which an understanding of boundaries is essential are 1) the pulpit, 2) transference, 3) touching and hugging, and 4) intimacy. The Pulpit The pulpit is a tool that can be used for positive or negative ends. Negative ends include: • Furthering our own agenda, as when there’s conflict within the congregation/sangha; • Promoting ourselves, as in drawing attention to our keen minds or smooth delivery. When we give in to those temptations, we are inappropriately crossing boundaries. Transference Transference is confusing feelings one has about one person with feelings for another, for example, confusing the spiritual leader with an old girlfriend or with the warm, generous father. In this confusion, the congregant may bring the baggage from that earlier relationship to the pastoral or teaching relationship. We need to be aware that: • A congregant’s/student’s interaction with us is often not about us; • We aren’t as wonderful or as terrible as the congregant thinks we are; • Praise for our leadership, preaching, or teaching is not a sexual come-on; • Dynamics of transference make congregants/students more vulnerable. When we use a transference attachment for our own gratification, we are inappropriately stepping over a boundary. hugging and Touch Boundaries Sometimes we think congregants need our touch. They may even ask for it. We need to consider: • Is this a transference situation? • Would touch be in their best interests or is it about our needs? • Is there a better way to convey warmth and caring? While touch is an important part of pastoral care, hugging or touching a congregant/student can be inappropriate boundary crossing. 79 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook Understanding intimacy Spirituality can be described as the “intimate connection between ourselves and God,” and sexual activity as the “intimate connection between ourselves and another person.” Sometimes these intimacies become confused for both the congregant and spiritual leader. Sexual sharing is one of the gifts of God’s creation. However, sexual contact with a congregant/student is clearly inappropriate boundary crossing and has the potential of doing great harm. notes 80 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org PRESERViNg BOUNdARiES: PERSONAL ANd PROFESSiONAL hEALTh guidelines 1. To Counsel or Not to Counsel • Do not attempt counseling unless you are trained as a counselor. • Do not attempt to counsel victims, survivors, or abusers without special training in this area. REFER, REFER, REFER. 2. if you do decide to Counsel, Set Limits • Avoid counseling in any setting that might suggest dating or other social interaction. • Limit the length and number of sessions—in advance. 3. Sexual Feelings • Be aware of any sexual feelings vis-à-vis congregants, clients, employees, students, staff, etc. (Expect to have these feelings.) • Acknowledge these feelings to yourself, to a supervisor, and/or in consultation session—not to the individual who is the object of those feelings, nor to any other congregant/staff member. 4. Sexualized Behavior • Do not attempt to sexualize any professional relationship. • If a congregant/staff member engages in sexualized behavior towards you, do not respond in kind. Rather maintain your role as spiritual leader and consult with a colleague, consultant, or supervisor. 5. Stress Management and Self-care • Provide for your own physical, psychological, and spiritual self-care with recreational times, time off to care for self or family, retreats, educational leave, etc. • As a check to see whether you are doing this, list activities you engage in outside your congregation. (Institutions have an obligation to support individuals’ self-care efforts through financial support and generous leave policies.) 6. dual Relationships • Do not enter into a dual relationship in which you are both spiritual leader and lover/partner to a congregant, client, employee, student, staff member, etc. If, nonetheless, you and one of those persons agree to pursue an intimate relationship, end your role as spiritual leader. • Try to avoid dual relationships with congregants, clients, employees, students, staff, etc., in which you relate to an individual in two capacities. • Try to avoid dual relationships in which you are both spiritual leader and friend. • If a dual relationship is unavoidable (for example, if you work in a small community, if you supervise employees and serve as their spiritual leader, if you are a priest in a seminary where you also teach), discuss the inherent problems and possible consequences with the individual(s) involved, establish whatever boundaries you can to limit the duality, mutually decide upon strategies for protecting the relationship you have as the other’s spiritual leader, and be open about the duality. 81 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook 7. Personal Relationships and intimacy Needs • Attend to your personal and familial relationships. Maintain and nurture them. • As a check, list the relationships you have with people who are not members of your congregation/sangha. 8. Avoiding Workaholism and Burnout • Be clear about your job description and the accompanying expectations. Institutions must take the first step by providing position descriptions and specifying expectations of staff. • When you encounter situations beyond your expertise, consult and refer. If your workload seems unreasonable or unmanageable, discuss this with a supervisor or consultant and see what can be done. 9. Supervision and Evaluation • Ask a supervisor to meet with you periodically to review your position and work, if your supervisor does not do this on his/her own initiative. 10. Avoiding isolation • Maintain contacts with colleagues. • Consult regularly. 11. Spiritual Practice • Engage in regular prayer and meditation. 82 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org PARTiCULAR BOUNdARy iSSUES FOR AFRiCAN AMERiCAN FAiTh COMMUNiTiES – Kimberly Day-Lewis, J.D. Historically, faith and spirituality have been critical elements of black culture and consciousness. As centerpieces within the fabric of African American communities, churches and other religious institutions have served not only as houses of worship, but also as centers for social interaction and collective action in support of their members and the wider community. Clergy are often called upon to fill the leadership vacuum, and leadership has its privileges. In the African American community, people look up to clergy and give them deferential respect. The power of position and the community’s tendency to place the pastor on a pedestal present to clergy particular challenges in exercising restraint in their use of power. The rise in the number of independent churches means that systems of accountability may be non-existent. The predominance of females and the dearth of males within congregations add to the challenge. This dynamic may contribute to a sensitivity regarding the emasculation of African American males and the need to give them leadership opportunities that society denies because of discriminatory practices. Therefore, ministerial leadership may be predominately male and surrounded by female subordinates. If the leadership style is hierarchical and the congregation is fed a theology that emphasizes obedience to authority, male leadership, and female submission, the congregational system is ripe for boundary violations. Ministerial leadership may fall into dual relationships without awareness of the complexity of such relationships and the need to give attention to boundary issues. Independent churches founded by a charismatic leader or a family may request professionals among their members to provide pro bono services or may have congregants functioning as volunteer servants to the pastor and his/her family. There is wide diversity in the amount of formal theological education and training among African American ministers and a broad range of openness to seeking continuing education and training. Making training programs contextually relevant and accessible will be vital in delivering this resource to African American faith communities. 83 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook PARTiCULAR BOUNdARy iSSUES FOR ASiAN ANd PACiFiC iSLANdER COMMUNiTiES – Rev. Thelma A. Burgonio-Watson Boundary issues among Asian and Pacific Islander communities are not unlike those of any other community. However, boundaries must be understood within the context of the culture and traditions of a community. There are several cultural traditions and ways of relating in Asian and Pacific Islander communities that create particular challenges when dealing with boundary issues. Relational complexities are as much a given as they are in other racial ethnic communities. For Asians and Pacific Islanders, maintaining smooth interpersonal relationships is an especially important value and may be perceived as even more important than keeping appropriate boundaries. Sensitivity to this value is critical. At the same time, we need to understand that maintaining appropriate boundaries and fostering healthy clergy-congregant relationships are complementary, not counter to interpersonal relationships. Asian and Pacific Islander communities tend to be extremely close-knit. In general, it is natural for these groups to embrace their spiritual leaders as part of their extended family and to relate to their clergy as part of the family. It is, therefore, especially important that there be a clear understanding of boundary issues and of the challenges inherent in dual relationships, so that the best interests of the congregants remain primary in clergy-congregant interactions. In close-knit communities, hospitality and gift-giving are timeless values, deeply honored and practiced. While these values should not be abandoned, they should be studied in light of their inappropriate potential. Touching and personal space boundaries vary from one community to another. Clergy and spiritual leaders need to be sensitive to individual differences and preferences within their congregations. In Asian and Pacific Islander communities, congregants may look up to their clergy and may have a tendency to place them on a pedestal. They generally address clergy in a formal way, with respect and sometimes reverence. This may be a reflection of how much honor and respect congregants give to their religious leaders, or it may be a reflection of the hierarchical nature of the community. Culturally competent training can be an invaluable resource in clarifying how values in Asian and Pacific Islander communities may help or hinder the observance of clear boundaries that ultimately facilitate healthy and effective ministry. 84 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org PARTiCULAR BOUNdARy iSSUES FOR JEWiSh COMMUNiTiES – Rabbi Cindy G. Enger For Jewish communities, boundary issues are not unlike those faced by any other community. Yet there are some particularities. Jews are a minority population in the United States and throughout the world. While Jewish communities are clustered in metropolitan areas, and often concentrated in particular neighborhoods, Jewish communities also exist in small towns. Community plays a central role in Judaism. So does the family. For Jewish men and women, dating and marrying a person who is also Jewish is an important value. For rabbis and those seeking to enter the rabbinate, intermarriage (that is, marriage to someone who is not Jewish) is essentially prohibited. Thus, especially for single rabbis living in areas with very small Jewish populations, which are likely to have only one congregation, the question of whether to date a member of the congregation may be a very real issue. On the one hand, the rabbi finds it important and desirable to date a person who is Jewish and involved in the Jewish community. On the other hand, if the person is Jewish and involved in the community, he/she is, in all likelihood, also a congregant. Thus, for a single rabbi who is interested in finding an intimate partner, choosing to live in a community with a small Jewish population raises important boundary concerns, such as those raised in the DVD series, A Sacred Trust. These training and study materials refer to hugging and touch boundaries. For Orthodox Jewish communities, such boundaries are guided by religious principles and practices of modesty, which frequently include the prohibition of any touching or private meetings between men and women (other than that which involves married partners). Therefore, the discussion of touch boundaries needs to be understood within this context for Orthodox communities. 85 FaithTrust Institute Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics www.faithtrustinstitute.org Course WorkBook PARTiCULAR BOUNdARy iSSUES FOR LATiNA ANd LATiNO COMMUNiTiES – Rev. Luis A. Carriere Historically, Latina and Latino clergy have been conferred a great deal of authority, responsibility, and freedom over their congregants by their respective denominations, cultures, and nations. Traditionally, this has been conducive to long-term religious and cultural stability, health, and growth as clergy strive to provide in-depth care for the needs of their charges. The role of the Latina and Latino clergy is inadvertently magnified when the worshiping community experiences fluid patterns of migration, or when the community exists as a “culture within a culture,” that is, a minority group coexisting within a dominant culture. As a consequence, many Latina and Latino clergy find themselves overwhelmed, overworked, and isolated as they attempt to carry out their ever-growing responsibilities. Many feel that their education and training experiences have not adequately prepared them for the complexities of professional multicultural ministry. In addition, it is not uncommon for many Latino and Latina clergy to have limited and infrequent contact with their clergy peers or denominational leaders. Frequently, professional roles and boundaries are blurred by socio-cultural dynamics. Hierarchically, the clergy person is an ordained leader with power “above” the parishioner. Conversely, both the clergy person and congregant are “ethnic peers” who share the common struggles, experiences, and needs of many Latinas and Latinos who are trying to negotiate their way through the American landscape. These factors create a high-risk environment, which is conducive to the abuse of clergy power in general, and clergy sexual misconduct in particular. Specifically, male pastors who are prone to acting out sexually quickly learn the ease with which victimization may take place. The victimization of the Latina congregant is frequently compounded by the inordinate amount of authority the pastor has, the lack of support from denominational leadership, the lack of knowledge of how the adjudication process works, high risk of stigmatization within her family, church, and culture, and limited supportive resources (for example, counseling, financial, translation services, legal) within and without the Latino community. For some victims, fears around migration status may exacerbate their suffering by the real or perceived threat of deportation, thus, silencing and isolating them further. Latina and Latino pastors are encouraged to pursue culturally relevant continuing clergy education and support: specifically, in areas that address professional relationships, adequate boundary setting, a clergy code of conduct, and awareness and prevention of clergy sexual misconduct. Clergy persons need to find a culturally relevant supportive system that honors their Latino heritage, native tongue and culture, or nation of origin. Finally, pastors need to become informed as to the devastation victims experience. For the Latina victim, clergy sexual misconduct not only threatens to destroy her sense of self as a woman, person, and child of God, but her very culture and heritage as well. 86 Healthy Boundaries 201 – Beyond Basics FaithTrust Institute Course WorkBook www.faithtrustinstitute.org PARTiCULAR BOUNdARy iSSUES FOR LESBiAN/gAy/BiSExUAL/TRANSgENdEREd CLERgy OR SPiRiTUAL TEAChERS – Rev. Dr. Marie M. Fortune On the one hand, the boundary issues are the same across the board for all of us as spiritual leaders, regardless of our sexual orientation. On the other hand, it’s never quite that simple. In other words, the ethical norms and expectations are no different. And yet, the context in which a lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgendered (LGBT) spiritual leader functions is different. This increases the degree of complexity in addressing boundary issues. Some may argue that the socio-sexual cultures for LGBT folks (which are certainly diverse within and among these groups) mean that boundary issues or professional ethical issues are different than for heterosexuals. Not so. Sexual attitudes or practices within one’s peer group may or may not differ significantly from attitudes or practices of heterosexuals. But in order to insure the well-being of clients, congregants, students, or staff, it is critical that emotional, physical, sexual, and financial boundaries be respected in pastoral or teaching relationships. Any person, regardless of sexual orientation, can be harmed by the betrayal of trust by a pastor, rabbi, priest, or teacher. For LGBT clergy serving predominantly LGBT congregations, the issues are not unlike those for any other “minority” community or a rural community. It’s the problem of the “small town.” Dual relationships are common, particularly if one tries to patronize community businesses. Social or dating relationships can also be complicated. There may not be other congregations in the community that are open and affirming, but dating within one’s congregation carries all the usual risks and thus is not recommended. In addition, LGBT congregants may expect a degree of emotional intimacy with their spiritual leader and the congregation because of the need to create an alternative experience of “family,” especially if an individual is estranged from her/his family and/or dealing with issues related to those losses. Again the possibilities of the impact of dual relationships, favoritism, petty jealousies, etc., present a challenge to the LGBT spiritual leader. All spiritual leaders face the complex challenges of building community, participating in that community, and still maintaining a clear sense of role and leadership responsibility. Remembering to consider the following three questions when faced with the possibility of increased intimacy or boundary-crossing can help us stay grounded: 1) How would my behavior impact the other person (and his/her family)? 2) How would my behavior impact the congregation as a whole? 3) How would my behavior impact the viability of our mission as a congregation? In other words, in our public leadership role, we must always consider the effects of our actions on the larger project. Our behavior is never just about us as individuals. This is why we need friends, family, and relationships outside of that public setting (where we are playing a public role) to ground us and meet our personal needs.