5 What Is Common about Our Common Worship? A Methodological Critique of White Reasoning in the Process of Renewal of the Book of Common Worship, Presbyterian Church (USA) 86 Before the Introduction T he structure of this essay is somewhat strange. It hopes to show the reasoning that often undergirds and orders the ways of thinking and ordering liturgy and worship in Christian churches. Books of common worship are markers of this form of liturgical reasoning, often an unmarked white form of reasoning. But what is this white liturgical reasoning? That is what I try to show here. In order to do that, I will start showing the process of renewal of the Book of Common Worship of the Presbyterian Church (USA), the denomination of which I am a member and in which I am an ordained minister. 87 I was invited to be a part of this process. As I describe the movement of renewal of this prayer book, I show some of its very problematic core issues, which is what constitutes white liturgical reasoning. Once I get to that point, I make a detour to show how a white reasoning was historically created and how it functions. Once this detour is made, I go back to the renewal process of the book of common prayer and wrestle with the very notion of the “common” in this book. As I finish it, working with an expanded sense of leitourgia/ liturgy, I end with an example of how to think about the season of Pentecost not from a white universal liturgical reasoning but from a historical situation. The death of George Floyd defines the season and where we should align ourselves as Christians. It all might feel cumbersome, but I hope that, at the end of this long essay, it will make sense. Introduction This essay began as a contribution to the process of renewal of the Book of Common Worship of the Presbyterian Church (USA). 88 I had hoped that this reflection could help us in the Presbyterian Church to pay attention to the ways in which our liturgical methodology was marked not only by a distinctive theology but also by certain class, race, gender, and sexual commitments. I did not intend to be adversarial to my sisters and brothers or to dismiss the beautiful work that was already in process. Instead, I hoped to bring a vision from the underground, to surface a perspective from the fringes of our society and church that could expand the racial colors of our common faith, bringing light from the Black, brown, yellow, and red people of our society, from those who are undocumented, from sexually excluded people and disabled people, in order to expand the possibilities of our worship services. This work was just a small movement in the now vast and growing field of worship and diversity. I attempted to investigate, rather briefly, how the mindset of what I call white reasoning has placed minorities into the fringes of the leitourgia, liturgy, the “work of the people.” We, the racially, sexually, and otherwise minoritized and minority people and communities are at the receiving end of this liturgical enterprise, turned into peripheral categories by “universal” white reasoning. We are expected to receive the wisdom of our white brothers and sisters, ritualizing our loves and faith according to the grounds of wisdom and tradition handed to us. One form of knowledge, universalized, has served to deter other forms of knowledge in the name of “tradition.” My point was not, and is not, to dismiss the wisdom collected in the prayer book, since the gathering of wisdom necessarily needs people of all races, gender, and sexual orientations. The problem was the very absence of other people and other forms of thinking that would constitute a more complex notion of the common, at least to the point of not working with an unmarked and given sense of “common.” Thus, my hope was to expand the notion of what was “common”: to open spaces for other wisdoms, practices, and thinking from people historically colonized and designated improper, whose liturgical practices and thinking are often considered “low liturgy,” “popular,” “contextual,” or even “cultural” liturgies, as if the so-called universal liturgy were not also based on a particular cultural and contextual understanding of the body, of life, of race, sex, class, and worship itself. Throughout this essay, I attempt to evoke and encourage different or expanded ways of thinking, acting, gesturing, performing—indeed, different ways of living. I write with a performative mind. My main wrestling ground is an all-encompassing white reasoning that purports to be neutral, universal, and pure but instead is fundamentally patriarchal, heterosexual, colonizing, and grounded in exclusion. Leitourgia: Revising the Methodology of the Book of Common Worship 89 What is our understanding of the word leitourgia as we undertake the process of BCW revision, or for that matter, any prayer book revision in a mainline Protestant denomination, beyond the PC(USA)? When I ask this question I am inquiring not only into the meaning of the Greek word, but also into the theological sense of the assembly it brings with it, the understanding of “the people” we have in mind when we undertake our worship book revision. In other words, I am asking, “What is the role of the assembly, of the people, in this project? Who and where are the people we are working with as we revise and renew the Book of Common Worship?” These fundamental questions need to be addressed prior to the decisions about what prayers and practices we will choose and give to the people—the assembly—to shape their worship life. The meaning of leitourgia as “the work of the people” with which we are working (either implicitly or explicitly) will define both what “work” and “people” “mean when we engage in this process of renewal. With that, we may ask some obvious questions: What is actually the work of the people? Can the people, not (only) the ordained people, create liturgy? Who can create access to the holy things and decide who have access to them? What can people do in worship? To what fundamental “holy things” 90 should we ascribe and according to whom? What rubrics should be assigned? What are the holy things—symbols, ritual sequences, forms of prayer—we are going to offer to our people? What proper action or behavior will we allow in our worship spaces? What sources are we using and authorizing? And before all this, what kind of liturgical theological choices are we making? All of these questions bear witness to the notion of “common.” Who is the common in this book of prayer or whose common-ality are we talking about? I am not concerned in this discussion with the number of prayers of confession, the litanies we create, the clarity of the movements, whether eucharistic prayers are to be short or long, whether the presider should raise their hands when leading, how many feet away from the table they should stand, or how we condense, combine, and/or collapse services. I know this will be there. What is at stake for me is the common or the measurement by which we decide what being human is all about. What form of humanity is contemplated here under the generalized sense of common? What forms of thinking, of relations, of human experiences, of knowledges, practices, and wisdom are we talking about when we talk about a “common” book of prayer? “Common prayer” often means a form of experiences and way of living that shapes the beliefs, hopes, and troubles of one group that prays and worships together. Books of common worship are a historical report of one group of people at the expense of others. If not, why do we not have prayers and songs and litanies and confessions that are fully antiracist and deeply committed to the eradication of the systemic racism that kills and imprisons Black people? Why do we not have relentless woes and curses against white supremacy at each liturgy? Why do we sustain a bland universal form of worship that does not name the violence against LGBTQI people at every corner of our common history? Why do we never talk about colonization and the ongoing genocide of Indigenous people and the endless de-sacralization of their sacred lands? Caught in the dualism of the transcendence/immanence of God, these books are always above the earth, never praying with the earth but holding up a sovereignty that rules over the earth and over other animals or forms of life. In that way, books of common prayer are religious documents of white supremacy and white civilization, soft colonial support for politics of exclusion, white jurisprudence, and control of land and riches, a hidden manifesto on class struggles, and a clear orientation of the heart, the mind, and the body towards particular forms of social, political, economic, and religious control and dominance. It is hard not to add the books of common worship to the other civilizational documents mentioned by Walter Benjamin: “There is no document of civilization which is not at the same time a document of barbarism.” 91 The content and forms of our prayers have to do with power dynamics and how this form of power is dispersed within our forms of relationship to oneself and self with others. We must ask what understanding of self is proposed in our prayer, and self in relation to what? Also, how is the earth part of this common sense of life? Over against what strictures (strict structures) will we work in order to make sense of our sense of God in the common life of the people? The Book of Common Worship will surely enhance and close off spaces for liturgical possibilities, imagination, and context, giving a full sense of humanity and what is common. Moreover, we must say that in comparison to the 1993 Book of Common Worship, we can name several changes, namely, material in three languages, more emphasis on freedom (in both the rubricized prayers and the insistence in commentary sections that liturgy is contextual), and new sections on both the care of creation and justice and reconciliation. In this way, the Presbyterian BCW is already much more open to creativity and is more contextual and more expansive than other denominational books of common worship. My work is to try to figure out what kind of reasoning is underneath this process, the reasoning that will make us describe what it is to be human, humus, Earth, relationships, God, and each other. Thus, our work is not to keep asking how many prayers we need to add to the book but rather, to ask a more difficult question that comes before and that has to do with the methodology of our book of common worship, its theological commitments, the people we are serving, the worlds of injustice we are dismantling and the worlds we are creating, all marked at the beginning and at the end of this project, sometimes clearly noted, sometimes hidden in a given, expected sense of leitourgia. One of the main issues for me has to do with the place in which we are to start as well as our relationships and the forms of power dynamics that exist among us. These issues define our class belongings, our access to material and other goods, our relation to race, social access, and power. Since we hope to locate ourselves in the best sources of our tradition, often our liturgies get swallowed into a clear un/conscious purpose to reflect unspoken locations, as if the liturgy and its starting location float somewhere universally in order to keep local people and its class commitments protected. Who are we “representing”? Who are we working with and for? To what purpose? We just assume that we are doing the work of God for “all” and that is enough. This reflects a strong sense of acquired power through tradition. A pastor friend of mine is trying to bring poor youth into the churches she is working with, but time and again these young people have nothing to do with our liturgies or our ways of being in the world. Are they the very reason for our desires to create the forms of our worship? Are we working for those who lack institutional power to find their own way within our society? Must they conform to the institution and the divine liturgy? Are we working to make worship services that condemn and resist racism and homophobia in our society? The PC(USA) denomination is mostly made up of small, struggling congregations in quite different conditions and circumstances. We have a huge economic gap between the “big-steeple” rich churches and the struggling churches. Is this condition of being church what marks our liturgical efforts to make a “common worship book”? We cannot hide inside “universal” liturgies when we live in such an unequal and diverse national situation. This situation presents us all with a tremendous challenge, overall, and in our liturgies. Liturgical methodology must consider for whom and with whom we are doing this work. It must consider going from neutrality to clear choices and situated language and commitments, from the fiction of the purity of our faith and clear proper identity to the ongoing mixture of beliefs and multiple identities. The end result is often more attentive to “the tradition” than to the lives of the people. Can worship be the same in radically different locations? How can radically different churches pray the same prayer? How do we care deeply for poor, struggling churches and people under strenuous forms of oppression? How do we help create liturgical language to tackle racism, poverty, climate change, and economic inequality in our society? What does the grammar of our faith teach us to speak about? Thus, finding better prayers—or just more choices of prayers—will not suffice if we refuse to tackle the national sins of our country. What we actually need is to find a new methodology, one that is contextual, one that comes out of living with people, so we can find the feelings, the hurts, the settings, the situations, the relationships, the power dynamics, the ideologies, meanings and challenges of our realities. A key point here is to realize that any liturgical methodology needs to know what kind of people we want to sit with to learn and to pray together. If leitourgia is the work of the people with God, what kind of people are we talking about and whose God are we talking about? Who and where are they? What is the earth they are living on? Who owns that land? The current prayer book methodology tries to respond to a metaphysical God, a white God who lives in and through purity, universality, a certain neutrality, and a-historicity. This “neutrality” can be seen, for example, in the eucharistic prayers. We tell the history of salvation as narrated in the Bible and then we stop. We do not allow God’s action to be named within either older (than biblical history) or contemporary radical events of liberation/salvation. Once we land in the current history of our time, our liturgies become political in the sense of being actual living in the poli s, the city, the world, something we try to avoid at all costs. As if our traditional liturgies were not political! We are certainly not trying to make liturgy a political act in the sense of political parties. Liturgy is the way we love God, and our common prayers intend to honor and give worth to God. However, we need to wrestle with a politics of the understanding of “common” in our tradition. This concerns what is at the heart of our reasoning. A Detour: White Reasoning There is indeed something called white reasoning. In the book Critique of the Tupiniquim Reason (which he also understands to mean “Brazilian reasoning”), the Brazilian writer Roberto Gomes says that Brazilian reasoning could only take place through fiction, a fiction that begins by negating and denouncing reasoning without color, reasoning supposedly grounded in neutrality and universality. 92 White reasoning invented the Western canon from a mythic place of purity, a zero point of thought where everything is born, a self-enclosed essence where everything that is strange to that essence is shoved aside and excluded, or simply ignored as non-existent. Everything else, according to this reasoning, is fiction. Our Indigenous peoples and their reasoning, which are considered mythical or fictional themselves, could never beat the historical Greeks. In his Critique of Black Reason, Achille Mbembe, a thinker from Cameroon, also criticizes white reasoning. 93 White reasoning is inevitably related to a specific culture, the European culture descended from Greek-Hellenistic sources. White reasoning was created through the colonization process in the meeting of Europeans with Asian, African, and Indigenous peoples. These encounters troubled Europeans’ awareness of their own identity. By encountering other people, they had to make a double movement to define themselves: they had to both distinguish and equalize themselves with the people they encountered, establishing a deep distinction from Indigenous and African peoples and establish some kind of sameness when encountering Asians, the “Orientals.” The way to do this was not only to use power and brutal force to win over and subjugate these peoples, but also and fundamentally, to create a sense of identity through a developing form of reasoning established by slavery, the trans-Atlantic slave trade, the plundering of lands, and the exchange of merchandise. Through this process, the Europeans’ given sense of humanity had to be discussed, theorized, racialized, and composed through colonizing and modernity, the whitening of reason. In this process, the process of conquering was marked by a sense of civilization, purity, and salvation. All non-whites became the source of European identity: European colonizers and their compatriots and coreligionists negated the other so as to affirm themselves. By establishing the lack of humanity in everyone else, the colonizers fulfilled their own sense of humanity. In other words, during the colonization process from the fifteenth century on, there occurred a racializing of the ones who were to be conquered, the strange, the foreign. “Neutrality” became a code for God’s will driven by ferocious forms of power and dominance. As if the rulers of the faith were saying, “All we want to do is God’s will.” After severing people’s lives from their land, displacing the earth from knowledge, connection, cosmology, living, and survival, one of the tactics of this white European reasoning was to avoid the very relation to the earth, the soil, and where one lives. By abandoning local geography as the structuring of life, the unaware avoidance of one’s own cultural, social, and historical context was translated into universal truths. Thus, from the small towns of Germany, Belgium, England, Switzerland, and Scotland, the premise was that the (European) Christian way of thinking was a universal way of thinking about humanity. The local thinking of these places crushed the local knowledges of other places by enforcing a universality of thinking (cosmologies), feelings and behaviors (civilization), and religion (Christianity). With the advent of colonization and the uprooting of the conquered, a focus on space gave way to a focus on time; a variety of spiritualities and forms of worship had to give way to one form of liturgy and spiritual practice, and a particular tradition was turned into God’s desire. Anything that did not resemble this way of reasoning—and the related spiritual practices and understandings of God—was not proper Godly reasoning and was thus in need of correction, illumination, order, correction, and organization. We can see three major aspects of this totalizing way of thinking: universality, neutrality, and purity. A socially and culturally unmarked white reasoning shaped the world and marked everything with a certain truth, with “universal” (though in fact particular) values. Its ethical demands are always shaped from within that reasoning. So too in the realm of theology. The continent of Africa could never be as wise or important as Greece, the purported cradle of humankind. Western and Eastern Asia—“the Orient”—could never be the location of the most significant historical accomplishments and human creativity. Indigenous peoples could never be seen as bearers of foundational cosmologies and civilizations. White reasoning is neither naïve nor innocent, for it enforces the thinking of the appearance and behaviors that define—from the perspective of its own logic—what human life is about. For the purposes of our discussion here, we can say that precision of reason, historical authenticity, and coherent logic are European characteristics and that any form of reasoning that does not assume these characteristics, or reflect them as mirrors to oneself, must be considered less human, uncivilized, barbarian, or at least poorer, or not academic enough, or “popular,” an offense to the tradition. This colonial dominance continues today even under rubrics of niceness and openness to other cultural forms of worship. The central, centripetal, non-negotiable forms of believing and worshiping must always be the ones coming from the tree of white reasoning. If we look at our customary liturgical resources, what do we know or teach about theological, philosophical, or liturgical reasoning from Africa, Latin America, Asia, or Indigenous peoples of any continent, in our seminary courses? Their forms of knowledge were destroyed, what is now called epistemicide 94 or epistemological genocide. If they exist in that setting, they are present as adjunct knowledge in relation to the more enlightened fundamentals of white reasoning. But let us go back to the historical forms of white reasoning. During the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, says Mbembe, white reasoning was marked by “white thinkers’ indifference to slave trafficking.” There was little writing or fight against slavery, if any. This indifference was already shaping Black people’s lives in relation to white Europeans’. Indifference, couched as neutrality, was a way of denying, diminishing, concealing, and killing Black people. This indifference was not neutral; instead, it created the contours of white reasoning, based on a racist core, dealing with anybody “other,” in this way: the stranger was to be de-nigrated, turned Black. 95 Anyone who was not white was thrown into a Blackness that served to form and define its opposite, whiteness. In other words, it was now necessary to respond to the force of race, and the answer was to turn all those who were not white into the categories of impure, lower races and groups: Blacks, Jews, Muslims, Natives, women, children. Over against this Blackness, Mbembe talks about not only the presence of whiteness but the necessary appearance of whiteness. He writes, The work of racism consists in relegating it to the background or covering it with a veil.... Racism consists, most of all, in substituting what is with something else, with another reality. It has the power to distort the real and to fix affect, but it is also a form of psychic derangement, the mechanism through which the repressed suddenly surfaces.... I have emphasized that racism is a site of reality and truth—the truth of appearances. But it is also a site of rupture, of effervescence and effusion. The truth of individuals who are assigned a race is at once elsewhere and within the appearances assigned to them. They exist behind appearance, underneath what is perceived. 96 This appearance of whiteness shows up as neutrality and universality, which can be understood as indifference and violence toward blackened races, working to dismantle their particularities. Its mythic purity serves to render everything else impure. All these dimensions of white “reality”—neutrality, universality, purity—must be enforced. Threatened by the Blackness of others, white reasoning had to deploy a whole complex of power dynamics to sustain its validity. Exploitation, control, and even annihilation of the newly blackened world was necessary. We see a “reasonable” movement of brutal forces moving throughout five hundred years of colonization of the Americas up until today, imposing structures and strictures of behavior and thought upon Indigenous, Black, and brown people. Coloniality is the reasoning of white supremacy at work, conjuring up a complex plethora of forced activities, a network of violence that aims at control and domination. As Mbembe says, “Colonial violence is a network, ‘a node of encounter between multiple, diverse, re-iterated and cumulative forms of violence,’ experienced as much on the level of the spirit as in ‘muscles, and blood.’” 97 Major forms of control and annihilation of these three groups of people have included old and new forms of theft and occupation of lands, slavery, socio-economic apartheid, mass incarceration, elimination of opportunities and resources, material and psychological barriers, economic constraints, and deportation. Most of the wealth of the Americas today, including here in the US, is in the hands of white people as a result of these centuries of theft and oppression. The private land in this country is stolen land, and now we all believe in a democracy that supports the rights of private land ownership. Despite color-blind rhetoric and the myth of shared public space, white dominant economic groups and private owners try to use media to shame Black people for “their” violence when they take to the streets, claiming that their intent is to riot and destroy “public common things.” White reasoning is not the privilege of white people only: colonized people of any color have participated in the same ways of thinking by adhering to orders, hopes of power, and acceptance by white masters. When properly “ideologized” and tamed, people of color are used to defend the white, hierarchical (and heteropatriarchal) establishment. The dominance of white reasoning has buried knowledge and weakened resistance by dark or blackened people. Let me be clear that I do not write this chapter as a personal critique of my precious Christian brothers and sisters. There is truly nothing personal here. What I am trying to do is to show the systemic ways many Christian denominations, and not only Presbyterians, have used their books of common prayer as a particular book of experiences with God and turned these experiences into universal claims. People on the receiving end have used these books in different ways. Some have embraced these books; others have rejected them; many transformations have taken place. I think, write, and perform from within as well as from outside of white reasoning. I understand my work as a counter-tradition, as resistance to and dismantling of a colonizing white reasoning that totalizes and neutralizes. I engage our worship and theology of worship as a Latinx, but a Latinx placed outside the dominant Latinx realm since I am a Brazilian-born American and Spanish is my third awfully broken language. In strange ways, I am also grateful for the faith I have received. As we examine the methodology of the Book of Common Worship and work toward its renewal, I hope we will challenge white reasoning by building our foundation with other forms of reason—of wisdom, of beliefs, cosmologies, cultures, movements, performances, symbols, languages, rituals. In other words, I hope that we will consider and engage different ways of being human. I am concerned that this has not been done. Expanding the Commonality of Liturgical-Theological Reasoning Our reasoning must be expanded if we are to continue to be both Reformed and reformed. Without fear! We need a more concrete sense of the people we are serving and working with so that our God will make sense in our liturgies. Coming from liberation theology, I would say that the choice of our theologies should follow God’s choice: the marginalized and oppressed. There, with the poor, where it hurts, is the place where we should start figuring out our prayers, confessions, sacraments, preaching, and praise. This feels like a dangerous move. What happens to our tradition and identities if we commit to the poor? To loosen our tradition might be a way to lose our sense of white belonging, and I imagine this is the source of our fear and resistance to transformation of our liturgies. What is the judge of our present liturgies? Jaci Maraschin, one of the most important liturgical theologians in Latin America, delves into these questions: The liturgical moment is always a kind of center where the memory of the divine lives in the past, yet facing the challenges and the exigencies of what is to happen. If the gathering emerges from tradition, but does not close itself to this tradition, its very nature is to be open to what has not yet happened, and turns tradition into a model for the future with the clear presupposition of a critique. That is why the judgment of the present precedes the celebration of what happened in times of liberation, and it is animated by the hope of what might happen because of our commitment to this common decision.... However, what kind of gatherings do we have now? Assemblies eaten away by the commitment to the powers of this world and captive to the social, political, and economic system, in which we live. That is why, in general, liturgical gatherings become tiresome, devoid of the vital element that would make them interpreters of reality, exulting in joy. 98 Thus the judgment of the present is fundamental for our task here and it puts tradition in a place of vibrant force, one of possibility of empowerment. The choice of which people we want to serve has also to do with the methodology of this renewal. We participants in the consultation about the Book of Common Worship renewal received a survey about the prayer book. The survey was essentially technical, since it was concerned with form, structure, and order. The survey was intended to be expansive in trying to encompass a variety of liturgical resources, but it failed to hint at something else, perhaps a more fundamental move: the survey did not take into account a contextual and embodied reflection. In other words, it did not reflect the pain and hurts, racism, and economic hardships of poor people since we as a church are a white middle-class people. The survey imagines a world without racism and with a lot of entitlement. I wonder, what is our understanding of “our people”? The formality and shape of our survey responses limit and define our work, a work somewhat detached from our bodies and any kind of real life. The survey comes before and after the body, never with it. What is expected in this survey is not a change in the ways we do the liturgical work of the people, as a possible way to become agents of our own histories with God, or how we live our prayers or check our confessions from harsh realities. The church of our survey is a church that has a clear sense of class—and a commitment to remaining of a particular class. The survey was a renewal of the (same) forms and (expansion of the same) contents of the book. If one looks at the previous Book of Common Worship, created twenty-five years ago ( 1993 ) and at the new one ( 2018 ), the only difference, it seems, is in more alternatives for prayers and greater ease of use. The main concern is with formality and not with the situation of our country and world. Could we foster a movement of the church toward lower classes and the margins of society and be with them in praise and worship? If we fight for this to happen, then we might have a more just distribution of resources to our people, and we can understand better what “common prayer” might mean. If we can listen to the earth, we can start perceiving our deep belongings: common realities and symbols, materiality, and spirituality, money, and social conditions in the same breath as prayer. For our prayer book to be fully accomplished in its commonality, it must be constituted of liturgies that would bring symbols and practices from beyond white churches and their theologies. A truly common worship book would have to have a diversity of expressions and forms. We need to have a variety of understandings of “decency and order” that go beyond a white reasoning imposing conformity, forms of understanding that would not only expand the understanding of time, of use of space, forms of worship and of cultural differences but would see racism as the utmost indecency, and social inequality as a fundamental worship disorder. Back to Leitourgia Let us go back to our sense of leitourgia. How do we understand the work of the people when we think about creating liturgies and liturgical spaces where the people of God can be reformed, by God? If we are to do liturgy as the work of the people for the common good, we may need to pay attention to what Ruth Meyers wrote in Missional Worship, Worshipful Mission: Leitourgia is formed not directly from laos, “people,” but from leitos, which means “concerning the people or national community”—that is, “the public” or “the body politic.”... When I use the term “liturgy,” I have in mind both the structured ritual activity that involves texts and actions, using symbols, speech, song, and silence, and the assembly’s work for the common good, its public service as a gathered community and as the people of God in the world. Liturgy as work for the common good is thus a form of participation in the mission of God. 99 This definition, while still constrained by an unmarked sense of liturgical reasoning, an absence of pluralities and diversities of being with each other and in relation to the earth, is still a good understanding of leitourgia as it relates to the common good. Thus, I wonder if our group of liturgical experts has been working on behalf of the people and not with the people. If we understand liturgy as being with the poor, then, we must notice that we are mostly working in a safe environment telling people in dreadful situations what is common to our group and how to pray our way. But if our sense of liturgy is to serve mostly a middle-class community, then the understanding of “the people” might mean those currently counted in our formal statistics. There is something wrong with this scenario. “Our people” must include those whom we are called to join: the least of these, those outside the four walls of the church. Could we think about moving to the first theological choice: be with the ones abandoned by everyone? Then we could start a new way of revising the prayer book. A group reforming the denomination’s prayer book should begin by gathering its content, not by a new-old formal shaping of an already fixed source and understanding of liturgy, but rather, begin in reality, in specific places, in context, with issues that are killing our people and destroying the earth. From there we will shape our lex orandi/vivendi/credendi, or in other words, what is common, how to resist the forces of death and destruction, and how we can share a bit more in life as we say these prayers. Then a sense of universality could finally, miraculously, be achieved. We need a new methodology for the creation of a book of common worship, a methodology that actually takes us to the places of pain, hurt, injustice, and death and that will help us pray and sing from these places. If that is the task of the Book of Common Worship and other prayer books, we cannot avoid the very naming of places, situations, contexts from and with which we must work, and we must address this naming fully. If we look at reality, three major threads are shaping the United States that should shape our worship services as well: the patriarchal fascism that is taking over this country, the war against the poor, and the extractivism of the earth. Our worship book should not only offer prayers and instructions on what to pray, but also be a source of resistance for our communities to 1 ) gain consciousness about these issues, 2 ) gain new language to pray about these issues and respond to these realities, and 3 ) create forms of resistance and reciprocity. In this way, reformed Reformed worship services would be faithful to our tradition’s core sense of constantly being reformed, but also assist in the undoing of the structures of evil that swallow our glorias and take away the breath of our praise to God. It is safe to say that our predominantly white church does not feel the need to think much about racism. We are “safe” and determined to keep our spaces safe. Most of our white middle-class churches’ members do not worry about their children arriving home safely or getting sick from working in unsafe conditions. Our church is one of the institutions that, when it does not consciously and vigorously denounce racism, contributes to social and racial injustices and divisions. How can the pain and despair of Black folks be in a book of prayer that wants to be “common” when these experiences are not common to most of this denomination? Thus, if we speak the names of the devil in our worship to God, such as racism, patriarchalism, xenophobia, sexism, social exclusion, and depletion of the earth, in their local and broader contexts, we might gain a better sense of the hardships and the difficulties of the struggle for hope against these evil forces, both within and beyond ourselves. Let me say that I am not advocating superpowers for liturgy, as if we could change the world from that one place. Our rituals of worship are just one aspect of our faith. Nonetheless, every part of our faith, and fundamentally our liturgy, where we learn so much of our Christian faith, should be a part of our bending with the arc of justice, a vision of our empowerment by the grace of God, through faith, hope, and love, to speak plainly and openly about God’s reality in a way that names, and thus in some sense removes, the mystifying power of a racist agenda. Subverting Our Liturgies: Naming Our Racism Speaking to my class “Worship and the Arts,” McCormick Professor David Daniels once said that we have to create “disruptive liturgies,” liturgies that subvert white privilege by interjecting anti-racist forms of worshiping God.” In the making of our liturgies, he said, “We should ask: does this liturgy mention the Black Jesus? From whose points of view is liturgy done? Is our white view privileged? Are the views of people of color privileged in the liturgy? Are races present? Does [the liturgy] deny despair?” The white reasoning of which I spoke earlier is also mirrored in what Daniels calls white-Anglo liturgy. He defines a white-Anglo liturgy as “shaped by white concerns such as the white guilt, shame, culpability, alleged innocence, love without justice, peace on white terms, and/or bewilderment, a liturgy focused on ministering to white people. A liturgy tied to a progressive white frame of seeing as a frame of reference.” If a book of common worship is always a reflection of its time, what are we saying if our worship resources do not bring ways to undo racism and confront an evil that is literally exterminating the Black people of this country? Does our liturgy make us complicit? And let us not forget the Native Americans who are almost exterminated. Our Book of Common Worship should struggle against five hundred years of colonization, including its universal, white, unmarked worship services. This means that the new BCW should help move us all towards places of hurt and exclusion and disaster. From these places—prisons, the wall between Mexico and the US, poor neighborhoods, failing school districts, neighborhoods controlled by drug dealers, modern slavery, racism, economic exclusion and poverty—we will create prayers, choose songs, frame our worship services, decide about our eucharistic food, and shape our liturgies, calling people to worship God. From places of violence and abandonment, we will confess at the baptismal font our complicity with the economic system, preaching against the hegemonic forces of the state against the poor. At the eucharistic table, we will announce that no one goes hungry, that everyone is the imago Dei, and that freedom, equality, and social justice are possible. The table of communion will be a table filled with food and reciprocity, where we learn with each other and are forever changed. From dirty rivers, we will confess to the waters our lack of care for God’s Earth and commit to taking care of the rivers near our homes until they are alive again. This is what a liturgical methodology and a liturgical theology must consist of for our new worship book. This methodology will foster and bring forth a mixture of several reasonings so that it can help undo the violence of a hidden white reasoning that is grounded in a certain cultural sense of order and decency. We need to add other forms of reasoning. David Daniels talks about African American liturgical reasoning’s giving us “a liturgy shaped by African American concerns such as racial equality, justice, empowerment, anger, reconciliation, disillusionment, and despair. A liturgy focused on ministering to Black and non-Black people. A liturgy tied to a progressive ‘Black’ way of seeing as a frame of reference.” If we continue to add different frames of reference and a variety of cosmologies, we may start to dismantle white reasoning by infusing transformative liturgies that belong to other forms of reasoning. With this variety of non-white reasonings, with all their dangerous ways of being human, we can foster not only different liturgical theologies but different world-views and possibilities for life, living into different senses and forms of thinking, trusting God and each other until we develop a true priesthood of all believers in worship. The priesthood of all believers is a whole community accountable to each other as its members break systems of poverty and all become equal before God and one another. This community will not turn worship into its own image, as another consumerist good to buy, but rather, its members will be challenged in their desires and in their actions, and will be able to search Christian history and find sources of empowerment, liberation, blessings, and solidarities. I can only believe in a Book of Common Worship that is a garden with a variety of seeds for flowers and plants of all kinds and from various places. Perhaps we should visit congregations across the United States that are poor churches populated by undocumented people, talk to the Black Lives Matter Movement, visit Indigenous people and learn from them, do chaplaincy in prisons, listen to the birds. Perhaps our children should tell us what is common. That would finally be the common place, the common good, the common life for us all. Only in this way can we learn from various peoples across the nation what they say and do, what feelings they have, what emotions they cherish or wrestle with, what local symbols they use or how they use the Christian symbols to survive, what songs they are singing to sustain their own faith and in what conditions they are living God’s grace in and through their bodies. In this movement, we would develop a sustained sense of how our bodies live out, are marked, punched, moved, filled, transformed and trans-versed by this faith. Then we would come with our expertise and prayers and songs to perhaps expand the sources of liberation and offer something that is not already there. I am calling us to do what the philosopher Antonio Gramsci calls the work of the “organic intellectual.” We the organic liturgists, preachers, theologians, Bible experts, adding our expertise to the expertise of the people and the wisdom of la vida cotidiana, the quotidian life. Then we can begin to distribute the sources of our faith to the poor—and not only our prayers but the monetary resources of our institutions. In this way, we will have a worship book that carries the possibility of a common life. What if we go be with the people who are hurting, to early pick-up lines for day jobs, and stand there with them? Or go with undocumented immigrants working on tomato plantations, or stay with homeless people on the streets to understand what it means to be homeless? Or listen to Black communities always under vicious attacks and learn how racism is deeply woven into the threads of our society? Or go and listen to Native Americans and see and hear the ongoing violence against their lands and lives? From these places we can sit down to hear and cry together and learn prayers and songs that we can bring back to our communities. Professor Daniels gave to my class the trajectory we must follow, an exceedingly difficult one. What should our liturgies do? He answered, “Expose, subvert, and transcend.” And I add: Liturgies will expose our racism and injustices and hatred and class struggles. Liturgies will subvert economic disparities and will restore our prayers for equal distribution of wealth, within the church and in the world. Liturgies will transcend the limitations of our situations, fomenting and creating places, contexts, relations, and power dynamics that will show the real work of the people with God and the commonality of our lives. In this way, we will learn that liturgies, as well as theologies, should always be a second step, to be done after being with people. An Example: Pentecost 2020: Let it Burn! 100 One example of how to orient the liturgical calendar and our common resources is to read from a particular place, paying attention to the surroundings and the commitments our faith must make along the way. I wrote these words after the death of George Floyd and the fires burning around the country. The idea is to show how thinking of a liturgical time from the perspective of the margins, from perhaps another form of reasoning, can foster other forms of prayers, liturgical actions, preaching, and sacramental emphasis. I wish to show a way we might orient our faith from real situations. From a local place, we say a prayer to the world. George Floyd, a forty-six-year-old Black man, was mercilessly killed by the police in Minneapolis. João Pedro, a fourteen-year-old Black boy, was playing with his cousins at his house in Rio de Janeiro when the police shot his house seventy times and killed him. The streets and buildings of Minneapolis and other cities are burning. Like previous burnings in Baltimore, the burnings are signs of power, resistance, and a deep awareness of Black people and what it means to live in a country dominated by a white elite ever since the invasion of the Americas by the white culture that permeates every inch of this country. Only Black mothers and fathers know the fears of not having their children back home at the end of the day. This white culture is spread through every street of the US and within the whole democratic system, including forms of legislation. It invades every single institution, from local political groups to local churches, gerrymandering, and voter regulations, from lack of workers’ rights to wage disparity, from political party systems and legislative representatives to the Supreme Court and the White House. Everything is infused with forms of living, thinking, and organizing that come from white values and their forms of living, perceiving, and feeling. This structure trickles down in every form of local power dynamics, school districts, poisoned waters, state austerity budgets, male domination, military might, jail and prison systems, school access, and police forms of domination. All of the historical processes that built this country have served only to fuel a fire that was already running underneath the social threads of this country and that is and will always be ready to explode. There is no way that this country, ruled by predatory capitalism, will not have its buildings burned and its fortunes and ways of ruling put at risk. It is part of the game. White supremacy and fascism are foundational parts of capitalism, and as long as we have capitalism as the system of organizing life together, there will be no way to dismantle racism, white supremacy, and fascism, or not to have buildings burned. Since crisis is built into the capitalist system, crisis will always be necessary. The crisis of the neoliberal capitalist system tends to be economic, with the crashing of the market once in a while for more domination and stealing, but also by using natural disasters. Water spilling into New Orleans’ Lower Ninth Ward gave way to the economic advantages of vultures sucking the blood of the poor. Along with a growing number of deaths caused by COVID- 19, especially of the poor, we see that the world’s richest billionaires have continued to enrich themselves. 101 Our hopes have been crushed. We all feel the closing in of public spaces, the shortening of resources, the destruction of the earth. The increasing pauperization of the world will grow exponentially, and crisis will continue—we just don’t know to what point or extent. The earth is giving us ample signs that we are killing ourselves and there will be nothing left for us if we do not change. The burning of Minneapolis is also telling us that if we do not change, something else will happen that will be worse than we imagine. The death of George Floyd in Minneapolis set the Black community on fire in a country where people go on with their lives pretending that everything is all right and this is the greatest country in the world. George Floyd’s death shows us that this country is a nightmare for many of its own people. The fires on the streets are signs of life from Black people putting themselves into re-existence, the loud “language of the unheard,” as Martin Luther King Jr. put it. As I see it all, I join them with my heart and soul. I will never condemn them for doing what they are doing, for they are trying to survive in this country. I would rather condemn the politicians (be they Republicans or Democrats), the market, the banks, and financial corporations for what they do. They should be persecuted for what they have historically done to Black folks and Indigenous people and brown and yellow people with the stealing of the land, erecting of walls, and building of private jails and concentration camps. I will never condemn Black folks for their strength and bold courage for saying no, for saying “No more!” Theirs is the kingdom of God! They are my people! In fact, they are breathing the breath of God into us, the fire of the Holy Spirit. Pentecost! From the lives of Black people! A gift from God! The whole Gospel for Pentecost Day is in a speech by Martin Luther King: I think America must see that riots do not develop out of thin air. Certain conditions continue to exist in our society which must be condemned as vigorously as we condemn riots. But in the final analysis, a riot is the language of the unheard. And what is it that America has failed to hear? It has failed to hear that the plight of the Negro poor has worsened over the last few years. It has failed to hear that the promises of freedom and justice have not been met. And it has failed to hear that large segments of white society are more concerned about tranquility and the status quo than about justice, equality, and humanity. And so in a real sense our nation’s summers of riots are caused by our nation’s winters of delay. And as long as America postpones justice, we stand in the position of having these recurrences of violence and riots over and over again. Social justice and progress are the absolute guarantors of riot prevention. 102 In Acts 2: 2 – 3, we read, “And suddenly from heaven there came a sound like the rush of a violent wind, and it filled the entire house where they were sitting. Divided tongues, as of fire, appeared among them, and a tongue rested on each of them” (NRSV). Pentecost can be understood through three lenses in this year of 2020: Fire “... for indeed our God is a consuming fire.” —Hebrews 12: 29 Fire! We need fire! Fire that will burn buildings, systems, oligarchies, “democratic” systems, pretensions of common life and fake mutual care. Fire that will burn religions, scholarships, spiritualities, forms of knowledge and financial exchange that contribute to the collective death of us all. Fire! Our God is a consuming fire! Consuming fire that puts down any human project made of injustice and the appearance of fairness. Consuming fire whose uncontrollable choreography will dance around our protections and pretenses, order and decencies. Consuming fire consuming every private property so we can finally understand that nothing is private but belongs to all. Then burning the privacy of excused treaties, secret changes in political offices taking away resources from the poor time and again and giving them to the rich. Consuming fire that burns private ownership of anything. Consuming fire burning false spiritualities of Christians who think that holding worship on Sundays will be enough to hold onto the name of Jesus. Consuming fire burning every liturgy or sermon that does not say the name of George Floyd with a loud voice, churning stomach, and trembling heart. Consuming fire to any rationalization of the protests that does not take a clear side with Black people. Consuming fire that compels our work around public gestures of change to local policies, police force, and demands that legislators change, listening to the voices of those abandoned. Consuming fire to the nuanced and blunt entitlement of white folks, be they liberal, very liberal, conservative, or of any other political ideology. Consuming fire to any church who does not start an anti-racist workshop and teach its folks about the history of African Americans in the US, Black theologies, Womanist theologies, and Black religions. Consuming fire to any confession of sins that does not pause at the death of George Floyd. Consuming fire to any blessing that is not preceded by “woe to” those who are keeping racism in place. May the fires of Baltimore, Minneapolis, and other places spread across the world so our that faith can be enflamed by the presence of a burning Spirit who is unruly and will not accept anything less than a life fully committed to all of the abandoned, enslaved, oppressed, jailed, poor people in this country and elsewhere. Fire everywhere! So we can rebuild from ashes. Ashes not only from our Ash Wednesday evocation of ashes, but ashes that come from the fire of the Holy Spirit who burns works of injustice and white supremacy. Ashes The ashes of Minneapolis’s burned buildings are clear signs that this time, our time, is over. Time cannot wait anymore. Nothing else is working. It did not matter that Black people used their music, art, knees, and protests, screaming “Black Lives Matter!” Nothing could change the minds, souls, and structures of a country living off the oppression of Black people. Ashes! Time is up! Time is over! Ashes will tell us that a new time has arrived, a time that is uncountable and uncontrollable and cannot be narrated anymore, since time will be counted by the nobodies of the world. They are the agents of this new time. The nobodies of this country are saying to all, we are nobody for you, but in our communities we are somebody, and it is this somebodiness that will destroy the pretense of nobodiness that you threw us into. We are more! Look at your streets: the ashes of your buildings are the signatures of the nobodies! We are the nobodies whose names you cannot speak in your clubs, houses, churches because silence is what you have chosen. Now take a look here and see our names, nobodies! We are the fire that turned your world into ashes so we can perhaps start in a different time with new narratives, new legislations, a new life together, mutual respect, and new forms of distribution of wealth. Your safety is not as safe as you thought. All of us, not only Black people but also all of the blackened people in this country, all who were made nobodies, we are back to terrorize your kindness and your niceness. We are coming and will be coming back again. Remember the fears you have lived with your whole life but tried to deny time and again so it would not be embarrassing? The fears deep inside that used to flare up when we got close to you? You thought that controlling the fear would keep you safe, didn’t you? I know you didn’t want to live this way. But you didn’t do much to change, right? So the nobodies—they are the very measure of life you thought never existed. We came back with a vengeance. We came back as the nightmares you have decided not to pay attention to. We are the ashes of your world. Ashes upon ashes, the debris of a world that didn’t work when organized just for a few, even though you thought it was for all. As we are taught, let the injustice be without making too much of a fuss, and things will find their way to oblivion and cultural structures of normalcy. Ah, you thought we were defeated, but you should never underestimate the power of those who have survived centuries and are still standing. We have seen wars of all kinds and we have survived. We are still standing. From Brazil, a country that also knows Black oppression, philosopher Vladimir Safatle writes: It is true, we lost several times, but we were never defeated. For our defeats are, in fact, the high fire that forges the steel of our victories. Every true victory is the result of a profound loss. It reverberates with the animal desire to never lose again. Therefore, only those who fell and patiently wait for a second chance will win. It will come sooner than we expect. That’s what leads us to affirm that such losses are not defeats at all. 103 We will multiply, we will resurrect! Our ancestors will come back for us and they are telling us that the time is over. Our memories, our songs, our ways of being will sustain us. We will use everything we can and want. We have prayed over the ashes of our sons and daughters for too long. Now you will know what it means to face our strength. Not for revenge, for we have no business in revenge. But simply because of the law of circularity. We harvest what we plant. Roughness is the new harvest and our love will not be easy. In hope, the Spirit of ashes will resurrect all of those who enter into this new time, a time of the Spirit, a time unknown, a time for deep changes, a time to lose individually and gain collectively, a time not merely to change our prayers, but to change the world. Breath/Spirit This change can only happen if the breath of the Spirit is breathing our lives together. This breath is fundamental to our living. The coincidence of COVID- 19 and the extinguishing of George Floyd’s breath is stunning. In the pandemic, we have been attacked in the most precious thing we have: our breath. We have put our knee on the necks of animals, destroying their own spaces, we have invaded their habitats and used them for our own sake. Now we are living with the result of the overuse, abuse, and dominion of the earth. Capitalist white society has put its knee on the necks of Black and blackened people (Indigenous, brown, yellow, poor), stealing their resources, uprooting them from their lands, and then abusing them, displacing them through redlining, gerrymandering, throwing them into the corners of our cities and giving them the opportunity to come back to work for whites in the same cities. In the US and in Brazil, there has been a genocide of Black people and Indigenous people. The structures of racism are murdering Black people everywhere. The lack of care for the most vulnerable during the onslaught of COVID- 19 is taking its toll within the Indigenous, Latinx, and Black communities. Everywhere, people literally cannot breathe. Frantz Fanon has seen the difficulty of breathing in many cultures; he sees this not in one group but in an expansive “we” who cannot breathe. In Black Skin, White Masks, he writes, “When we revolt it’s not for a particular culture. We revolt simply because, for a variety of reasons, we can no longer breathe.” 104 George Floyd couldn’t breathe, Black people can’t breathe, Indigenous people can’t breathe, the brown people at the borders can’t breathe, the earth can’t breathe, a whole population of humans and species and plants and forests can’t breathe either. If anything, this Pentecost has to remind us of our collective breathing: breathing life together into new worlds and other ways of living. For we either breathe together or no one will breathe at all. The breathing of the Spirit is the breathing of life. This Pentecost, we are challenged to see the fire in the world and give thanks for it. We are challenged to see the ashes of a world that did not work. And we are challenged to see the possibility of breathing new life-giving breaths together. May the memory of George Floyd and João Pedro bring about new worlds for us to breathe together. 86. An earlier, shorter version of this essay was first published as Carvalhaes, “White Reasoning and What Is Common.” 87. As much as it might not look like it, this work is a work of love. 88. Presbyterian Church (USA), Book of Common Worship ( 2018 ). 89. In September 2015, a group of mostly white people, mostly men, leaders and liturgy experts in the PC(USA) and liturgical experts from other denominations, gathered at McCormick Theological Seminary in Chicago to continue the process of the renewal of the Book of Common Worship. This was not a decision-making group but a consultant gathering asking a variety of people to offer their wisdom to the people of the church who were leading the renewal. I had hoped to speak this at the meeting, but time constraints did not allow me to do so. I continue to believe that if we fail to attend to this concern, we will have failed our call and our people. 90. See Lathrop, Holy Things. 91. Benjamin, “On the Concept of History,” VII. 92. Gomes, A Crítica da Razão Tupiniquim. 93. Mbembe, Critique of Black Reason. 94. Santos, Epistemologies of the South. 95. Denigrate: “If you ‘denigrate’ someone, you attempt to blacken their reputation, with ‘blacken’ here in its commonly accepted pejorative meaning. It makes sense, therefore, that ‘denigrate’ can be traced back to the Latin verb denigrare, meaning ‘to blacken.’ When ‘denigrate’ was first used in English in the sixteenth century, it was meant to cast aspersions on someone’s character or reputation. Eventually, it developed a second sense of ‘to make black’ (‘factory smoke denigrated the sky’), but this sense is somewhat rare in modern usage. Nowadays, of course, ‘denigrate’ can also refer to belittling the worth or importance of someone or something.” See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/denigrate. 96. Mbembe, Critique of Black Reason, locs. 842, 85 0, Kindle. 97. Mbembe, Critique of Black Reason, loc. 2266, Kindle. 98. Maraschin, A beleza da santidade, 133 – 38. Emphasis mine. My translation. 99. Meyers, Missional Worship, locs. 672 – 73, Kindle. 100. I write this in the living memory of George Floyd and João Pedro and all the Black people across the world who are killed daily by white supremacy, simply for being Black. ¡PRESENTE! 101. Ponciano, “World’s 25 Richest Billionaires.” 102. King, “The Other America.” 103. Safatle, Quando as ruas queimam, 12. My translation.. 104. Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, loc. 305, Kindle. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.