4 How to Pray from the Ends of the World A Methodology T he methodology of this work is associated with the methods of liberation theologies. It starts in communities that are hurting. It lingers with people hurt by economic oppression. It expands, complicates, and enriches its vision through an intersectional reading of reality, through social and economic lenses but also through the lenses of gender, class, race, culture, psychology, and ecology. It relies on Indigenous and local knowledges and resources that help us see what is at stake in our communities, the questions of life and death around us, and how to respond with Christian resources. Christianity is not a religion of individuals disconnected from the world seeking for some individual success or living for themselves alone. Rather, it is a faith that throws us into the world. The very core of being a Christian is to be thrown into the world to live Jesus’s life amidst those who are hurting. The work of the Holy Spirit in the Christian faith is to connect individuals with communities. To be a Christian is to be in community! A community only exists because of the individual and the individual can live and thrive only through being continuously challenged by the community. This reality can be summarized in the African word Ubuntu. Retired archbishop of Cape Town, South Africa, and Nobel Peace Prize winner Desmond Tutu defines Ubuntu in these words: Ubuntu is very difficult to render into a Western language. It speaks of the very essence of being human. When we want to give high praise to someone we say, “Yu, u nobuntu”; “Hey, so-and-so has ubuntu.” Then you are generous, you are hospitable, you are friendly and caring and compassionate. You share what you have. It is to say, “My humanity is caught up, is inextricably bound up, in yours.” We belong in a bundle of life. We say, “A person is a person through other persons.” It is not, “I think therefore I am.” It says rather: “I am human because I belong. I participate, I share.” A person with ubuntu is open and available to others, affirming of others, does not feel threatened that others are able and good, for he or she has a proper self-assurance that comes from knowing that he or she belongs in a greater whole and is diminished when others are humiliated or diminished, when others are tortured or oppressed, or treated as if they were less than who they are. 78 This! This is what the church must be. Ubuntu! The church as a communal gathering with all its challenges and demands, inspired by the Holy Spirit, empowered to be an agent of transformation in the world, honoring each person, promoting justice, protecting life for all. Collectively, we as Christians push forward into the liberation of all communities. One of the ways we do this is by thinking together, what Paulo Freire called conscientization, which counters social numbness, a sense of being in the world by oneself, with “a critical form of thinking about the world.” 79 This form of critical thinking also includes faith. The gospel of Jesus Christ is always a counternarrative. It is a counter-emotional life; it is a counter-way of living, counter to a world living in self-destruction. The gospel of Jesus leads us to struggle against injustice as we seek for collective peace. A true Christian faith reflects critically on the world we live in and questions why some people are pushed away from basic resources of life. This critical faith begs for a theological work that must be done with and among the poor. This means we need to be sent by the Spirit to where people are hurting the most, which is where God chooses to live. In theological language, we talk about God’s “ preferential option” for the poor. This preferential option does not deny love to anyone. It does not choose some over others in terms of ontological value or even religious affiliation: all are truly loved by God and deserve God’s encompassing love. What the expression “preferential option for the poor” 80 signals is that God is always at work on behalf of those who are suffering at the hands of oppressors. It is something like this: if a forest is on fire and another three forests are not, we will bring water to and care for the forest that is burning. In the same way this is true for our ecological world, this is also true for those who suffer because they have been unjustly kept away or taken away from basic resources that can help them live better. Thus, Christian churches should make a move toward the forests on fire, which are the places of poverty near their communities, in order to sit and listen, to stop and learn about those who are hurting. Perhaps those who are hurting are the unhoused people around the block, or immigrants waiting for day labor at a street corner, farm workers picking tomatoes in nearby fields, families in the city or neighborhood surviving on meager resources, single mothers struggling to educate their children while working in two or three jobs, or children and youth who don’t have support for education, refugees invisible to society, a polluted river, a community exploited by agribusiness, workers with very low salaries and poor working conditions, people in prison.... I am not suggesting that each congregation build bridges with all of these. Pick one. Begin anywhere. But begin. Create a network. Move out toward a suffering group in your community. Those churches to whom reaching beyond their comfort zone or their own population is new can create partnerships with churches that are already in those places and learn how to pray together. Since prayer and work go together ( ora et labora ), we have to learn how to pray and how to live from those prayers. For these initial steps in partnerships with churches that serve poor and disenfranchised people, we have to learn to approach each other with care, caution, imagination, compassion, and kindness. We need to learn as much as we can about people who live near our communities, listening to them and inviting them to be with us—as well as going to be with them where they are. We must do what Judith Butler calls us to do, to think in alliance: “For me,” she says, “the task is not to find a single or synthetic framework, but to find a way of thinking in alliance.” 81 In the words of Brazilian Indigenous leader Raoni Metuktire, “We can’t accept any use of violence anymore... the success of our generation is to obtain success in cooperation.” 82 To this thinking in alliance and cooperation, I want to add praying in alliance or in cooperation. This thinking-praying-cooperating in alliance includes cooperation between Christians and Christians of other denominations, Christians and people of other religions, Christians and atheists. Since we are moved by the Holy Spirit toward others, what we hope to do is not to find liberation just for our community but liberation for everyone and every community. Thinking and praying in alliance also means to pray with animals and mountains, rivers, flowers, seeds, fields, animals, soil, and wind. We are all intertwined in life, made of stardust, part of a cosmic movement, within this same earth. As Martin Luther King Jr. said in his “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” “We are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one directly affects all indirectly.” 83 We are all part of a whole, but this whole includes vast and deep differences: praying with others entails both learning to be part of a whole and acknowledging our deepest differences. As we move forward to think and pray together, we start with praxis: by practicing our prayers together. We start praying with what we have within these encounters and that connectivity will transform, correct, and expand our prayers. Our prayers are praxis, our first theology, and then we do the second level of theology as we write it, after our praxis. In other words, we reflect our faith on the ground, by praying with people who are different from ourselves, and then we do a second reflection, which is to come back to worship with our congregations to pray the prayers we learn from living with the larger community. For as long as it is necessary. Below is a suggestion of steps for you to engage your community. You can adjust them to your local congregation and context. 1 ) Teach your church how to pray with the poor. Use liberation theology’s resources that can help you learn about God’s preferential option for the poor. Engage your community to go out and do mission by praying with people—for instance, one of the groups I mentioned above in my examples. This work does not prioritize giving money to other organizations; it is not meant to create an environment for the people with whom you are building bridges to come to church, but to have people from your congregation move outside of the church building and into the places where people who are suffering live—and, among other things, to pray with them there. 2 ) Examine your community, starting with your neighborhood, and then your town or city, to see where people are hurting economically. From this economic perspective, you will see why few people have so much and so many have so little. Connect with groups working with poor communities like the Poor People’s Campaign 84 to help you have a deeper systemic view of problems around you. From the ways we establish the law of our living together, the eco-nomos, we witness many forms of violence and hurt that are present and that you will need to become aware of and try to attend to. 3 ) Choose one community or group of people with whom you want to connect. Make contact, listen to them, see what their needs are and ask if you can be a part of their lives. Only say that if you mean it—if you are open to your own transformation. 4 ) Before you go, learn why this community or group is there. If it is people who are homeless, learn the history of public policies in your city or state that have contributed to this situation. Is it lack of medical assistance? Possibilities of jobs? Education opportunities? What is their agency? Their forms of survival? Check if there are other organizations working with these people already and add your presence. Evaluate strategies of action: interview people, live with people, learn what they eat, what they celebrate, what their challenges are. A pastor friend told me about a church that wanted to bring in people who were homeless to attend church regularly. When coffee hour came, the guests ate all of the donuts. The church members were outraged by their lack of manners. This is evidence that our good intentions toward others are never enough. We ourselves must change. 5 ) Find strategies for communities to get to know each other. Listening deeply is paramount. 6 ) Every time you meet with those “outside the gate,” go back to your church and, with the people in your congregation who were part of your initial outreach, start to pray, naming the real, concrete situations of that community. May your prayer be an opportunity for conversion and transformation. Continue to pray and meet with the community you visited. Invite them in and create opportunities for other forms of community experiences such as shared meals and gatherings to get to know each other’s needs. 7 ) Find ways to create prayers that become common for both groups, prayers that can inhabit the worship space but that can go beyond the sanctuary. See how prayers can change the ways the church creates the budget. How can this new community with which you are building a relationship be central to the ways the church worships and lives in the world? What needs to be changed? Uses of space? Mission provision? Offerings? What are the priorities of your church now? How can you make sure that each person who is homeless can have a house in which to live? 8 ) Then, continue to create prayers with your church and the people you are engaging with, adding the prayers of this experience with the prayers of your own church or denomination. Anyone can say their prayers. What prayers can be prayed? With whom? What does your prayer say about your God? What do your prayers say about what or who your God is? Martin Luther King Jr. wrote in his “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” I have traveled the length and breadth of Alabama, Mississippi, and all the other southern states. On sweltering summer days and crisp autumn mornings I have looked at [the South’s] beautiful churches with their lofty spires pointing heavenward. I have beheld the impressive outlines of her massive religious education buildings. Over and over I have found myself asking: “What kind of people worship here? Who is their God?” 85 As we move into these practical ways of praying and engaging with other communities, with whatever strategies we find necessary for each community, we must answer this question: Who is our God? 78. Tutu, No Future without Forgiveness, loc. 31, Kindle. 79. Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed, 95. 80. This term “preferential option for the poor” is a hallmark of liberation theology in Latin America and part of the theological, political, ecclesial, sexual, and ethical thinking and practices within communities throughout the continent. 81. Butler, “Thinking in Alliance.” 82. Raoni Metuktire, “Instituto Raoni,” Facebook video, August 31, 2019, https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v= 521680488602310. 83. King, “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” loc. 219, Apple Books. 84. See https://www.poorpeoplescampaign.org/. 85. King, “Letter from Birmingham City Jail,” 299. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.