12 Praying with the End of the World It may be that when we no longer know what to do we have come to our real work and that when we no longer know which way to go we have begun our real journey. The mind that is not baffled is not employed. The impeded stream is the one that sings. —Wendell Berry 214 I n order to pray with people from the ends of the world, we must learn how to pray with the end of the world, which means witnessing closely with those whose worlds have ended so many times. Praying with the end of the world means learning to be prepared for the worst while building as best we can for another world that will come after this one has ended. Thus, to pray means to put soul into consciousness, as we saw earlier, 215 and to be aware of the worlds that are ending, offering compassion and presence to those who are dying, while we form, illuminate, and point to forms of resurrection within these dying worlds—in order that, perhaps, a new world can emerge. For this to happen we must listen and learn with Indigenous peoples, whose worlds have ended so many times through colonial settlers’ campaigns of genocide and theft of their lands. We must listen and learn with Black people, whose worlds have ended so many times through slavery, apartheid, and prisons. When Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, and João Pedro Matos Pinto were killed, Black and Indigenous worlds collapsed one more time. We must learn with Brown people, whose worlds have ended so many times thanks to NAFTA, the continuous vicious colonization of Central and Latin America, the building of walls, and the deportation and abuse of undocumented immigrants. With our own children in cages, our world has ended once again. We must learn with Palestinians, who suffer ceaseless ethnic cleansing and bloodshed at the hands of the state of Israel. Every time Palestinians are required to show proof of identity to enter their own land, their world ends. We must learn with the Dalits of India, whose inhumane treatment is beyond the pale. Every time a Dalit has to use bare hands to clean a latrine, their world ends. To pray with the end of the world is to learn about these worlds, the forms of colonial power that crushed them, and why those worlds succumbed to those powers. But to pray with the end of the world is also to know how these particular worlds have survived, why they are still here, and what gives them the strength and stubbornness to continue living. It is to understand how these worlds’ structures of life, their beliefs, their spiritual and religious forms of resistance and re-existence have continued, and why their people continue to sing and gesture into being new forms of life. Our historical moment is a time of death and possible resurrection. Due to ecological devastation, it seems everyone is arriving at the end of the world. Scientists have been telling us we don’t have much time to change, and that we must transform our ways of living. Yet, we do not seem to hear those warnings. Our entire world is being consumed by our desires, and we are literally killing ourselves. Our demands for food and consumer goods burn forests, deplete oceans, and extinguish many forms of life. We have severed every single form of relationship with the earth: emotional, cosmological, spiritual, social, cultural. Our bodies live as if disconnected from the earth, untouched, unhinged. It is the same with our homes, our churches, and our spiritualities. Our confusion is such that we have allowed fears of all kinds to seize our hearts. Our religions do not allow for much connection with the earth, and even God’s presence throughout the earth seems rarified or regulated under a minimal potency of glory. We are out of touch with ourselves, with what we know, and with what we don’t know. We are unable to know or say what we desire, but our demands blind us to what we ought to know. Our world cannot sustain these forms of human madness. Brazilian philosopher Déborah Danowski says that there is no longer enough Earth for the whole world. 216 We are living under multiple forms of climate disaster negationism, a form of denial that has historical consequences. Danowski traces the development of the term négationnisme: “Since 1987, [it] has been used in this way by French historian Henry Rousso, to denounce Holocaust revisionists, who said that there had been no extermination camps, that there had been no genocide of Jews, etc.” 217 Danowski also reminds us that the French term négationnisme is translated into English as denial, negation. One meaning is to deny, to negate; another is to be in denial, to be in negation, not wanting to believe, which can be understood, briefly, as the psychic mechanism necessary to prevent the subject from further suffering—and psychoanalysis has taught us that there are many pathological forms of this refusal of reality, of the twisting of reality. 218 Negationism or denial of the climate calamity happens in at least three ways. One form of negationism is the honestly held belief that all this talk about climate change is a hoax, fake news, a leftist excuse to control politics, a communist invention—so we’ll just keep living as usual. Another form of negationism is the phenomenon of powerful politicians and corporations manufacturing and paying for studies and publicity presenting climate change as a hoax, when they know very well the sorts of disasters that loom on the horizon. In Dónde aterrizar (Where to Land), Bruno Latour describes how global elites have engendered processes of denial and geopolitical and economic changes through their patterns of ownership, theft, and abuse of the earth. 219 This small global elite is aware of the disasters it is imposing on us all, and of how it is fostering the end of the world. Its members have abandoned the people and no longer even pretend they want to construct a healthy society for all. To put it simply, they lie, and they don’t care. Instead, they build underground bunkers for survival 220 and plan on relocating to Mars and creating other forms of life there. 221 However, for every action there is a reaction; a single movement creates a ripple effect. Our violent lifestyles lead in turn to the earth’s reacting with increasing violence. As Latour writes, “The reaction of some implies the reaction of others; both react to a reaction, much more radical, which is that of Earth, which has stopped fending off the blows and returns them with more and more violence.” 222 Our current situation does not bode well for a future open to our children, much less our grandchildren. Finally, we see a third form of negationism in the ways in which people like us—families, churches, intellectuals, and the academy—all seem to agree in different ways that climate disasters are indeed coming, but cannot muster a reaction, change their lifestyles, increase their awareness, and engage in forceful action that would demand politicians and government enact meaningful change. There are three reasons for this final type of negationism: first, the belief that God will intervene and fix everything; second, the conviction that somebody will eventually find a way out, and we will be fine in the end; and third, that since we don’t know what to do, we can’t deal with this horrid news, and we stop listening to it. In one of my courses on climate disasters, a student sent me an email after the first class, saying “Professor, I can’t deal with this... it is way too overwhelming and I get anxious and depressed, I am sorry, I cannot take this class.” We experience this emotion because we feel disconnected and alone. If we learn to live and pray in solidarity, we will know that our strength is never our individual strength alone, but the potency of many gatherings assembled together from many places and wisdoms. We cannot live in this world of billions of humans feeling alone and disconnected. We must engage in the work of prayer and solidarity. As Paulo Freire says, “Solidarity requires that one enter into the situation of those with whom one is solidary; it is a radical posture.... True solidarity with the oppressed means fighting at their side to transform the objective reality which has made them these ‘beings for another.’” 223 Prayer is a way of answering this denial, avoiding hiding, and being honest: honest about our own destructiveness, honest about our fears, and honest about God and what God means to us. Once we are honest about our condition, prayers can be gestures that keep forms of solidarities alive, preventing us from losing our own humanity, our connection, our ability to wonder, to sing, to pursue justice, and to help us build threads of life that are common to us all. Thus, if we do not pray in the manner of being for one another, we will not be able to go on. We have been marked by pedagogies of cruelty, 224 which teach us to normalize forms of death and violence in our societies. These pedagogies try to displace solidarity and compassion and impose upon us a sense of powerlessness and indifference. These forms of violence are making us all sick: human societies, animal societies, the waters, and the earth. When the earth gets sick, we get sick, too. We are living at a time in which we are losing our worlds. COVID- 19 took away our world, white supremacy steals worlds from people of color, and now our collective future has been taken away thanks to ecological destruction. Under these circumstances, prayer can be an antidote to denial and negation, anxiety and depression—and it can also lead to the creation of a new world, in line with what we have read on street walls around the world during the pandemic: A different end of the world is possible. Perhaps our prayers can begin with the poet Aimé Césaire’s question: What can I do? I must begin. Begin what? The only thing in the world worth beginning: The End of the World, no less. 225 How can we begin with the end of the world at hand? By not running away. Not by giving up, but by giving in to the end of the world. Perhaps the prayer “Come, Holy Spirit” can provide a model of this time. When we are afraid, we tend to recoil into our own cocoon, hoping something will happen to change the situation. We lower our expectations and wait for happiness to show up at some point. To go after a new world is too much work, we think. However, it is incumbent upon us to help initiate this new world with a sense of shared responsibility, where everyone is deeply implicated in the present situation. Prayer can help us gain the strength to join the struggle, to join a growing awareness that can be expanded even more when religious solidarities, social coalitions, and alliances of many kinds of places and organizations engage in bringing forth and creating forces to demand the end of this world. This process entails going deep into our colonized history and facing up to our individual despairs and anxieties. Vincent Lloyd, a professor of theology and religious studies and director of Africana studies at Villanova University, writes, Demanding the end of the world implies that interlocking systems of domination (anti-Blackness, patriarchy, capitalism, settler colonialism) have captured the world. It also makes a claim of faith: The world is never fully captured by domination. There is always a remainder. Because domination has infected our language and our perception, we cannot point to that remainder and name it. But in song, poetry, dance, protest, and prayer we can conjure it now, and we can project it into the future, visioning a world without domination, after the world’s end. New life awaits after the end of the world. 226 Demanding, reminding, perceiving, and visioning are ways of awakening to a new world, a world that undoes the one we know and builds a new one that is coming. Today forms of power and oppression are being shaken, and they will be undone. A new time is opening up to us. New charismata are populating the earth. We are in the midst of a crisis, living into a time of in-betweenness where the old has not left us, yet the new has not yet fully arrived. Political philosopher Antonio Gramsci explains powerfully why, for example, the rise of fascism is a symptom of these old forms of power approaching their end: “This crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear. 227 In this in-betweenness, we must pray with an awareness of this change and gain a little clarity about how to pray that the old leave us and the new arrive. We must learn how to cast out the monsters of this time while we still have time. So we begin in between the end of this world and the aftermath of this world’s end by avoiding hope. We do not need to sugarcoat our situation with promises of a better life, as if everything will be all right in the end. Indulging in such palliatives will only delay our process of renewal. However, we have to know that before it starts to get better, it will get worse. We don’t need a gospel that offers a pill to numb us against the pain of the world and anesthetize our feelings, transforming them into illusions that will only lead to our own demise. Hope is a response to fear. It often builds on dependence, and it can easily be used by those in power. Thus, instead of hope, we require courage and desire! Courage to face this time of monsters, and desire to create and foster new worlds after the end of our current world. Brazilian psychoanalyst Christian Ingo Lenz Dunker tells us more about hope and our desire: Hope is the effect of desire, not its cause. Retire the conversation around optimism or pessimism and leave it to moralists and coaches. Instead, let us reconstruct happiness by reconciling ourselves with the fact that desire cannot be conditioned to anything, for at this very moment, the fog of guilt and the shadows of fear will clear and we will discover, in this darkest hour, that it is only here that we recognize who, after all, we can count on. No one would need to give reasons for us to get involved in our desire.... For this reason, desire also operates better in a state of productive and uncompromising solitude than in a turbulent mass. When we realize that we have given up our most precious dreams in exchange for empty words, or the illusion of easy and inconsequential happiness, there is at least one benefit. We understand that happiness is costly, and that losing it is like losing freedom. 228 This way of understanding desire can establish a home through the work of prayer. Saint Augustine said that in prayer we desire the happiness that God can give us. “When the Apostle tells us: Pray without ceasing ( 1 Thess 5: 16 ), he means this: Desire unceasingly that life of happiness which is nothing if not eternal, and ask it of him alone who is able to give it.” 229 Our task here is to turn from the idea of eternal life as a thing of the future, and work from the knowledge that eternal life is right now, that we are fully loved in the present. Not for the fulfilment of oneself or self-infatuation, but rather, fully present with the whole earth as we listen to each other in care and gratitude. We then place the future of eternal life in God’s hands, but the eternal life of here and now is ours to build by the grace of God, fully build here in our present: fully alive, fully eternal with God in desiring life in fullness for the earth and all its inhabitants. Prayer and meditation will then desire into being the forces that will enable relationship between humans and non-humans, between the earth and the universes. Desiring this deep connection with the earth, we will become who we already are: the air we breathe, the soil we stand on, the wind who guides us, and the fire that both extinguishes what needs to vanish and gives us warmth to keep us alive. Prayers then will be about desires opening up practices that restore our collective life, both within ourselves and with the earth, wherever we live. Prayers and meditations will be exercises of mutual desire to sustain and support life everywhere, to dwell with those living at the end of the world, to fight each other’s fights, sustain our collective wisdom, empower ourselves within our own struggles, and change our forms of knowledge and faith. Prayers and meditations will act as interventions, forms of bridging the knowledges of local populations to stand firm against the universality of any religion. Prayers and meditations will open themselves to mutual power and to leadership by women, Indigenous peoples, and rural workers. Prayers and meditations will be suffused by multiple feminisms that break down any form of hierarchical male power and pray the prayers of all women, especially women of color. Prayers and meditations will be the means of cracking open the present, when so many things are ending and we are grieving and struggling to breathe: prayers as means of cracking open the present to postpone the end of the world, but also as ways of modeling new forms of being after the world’s end. Prayer will become a dedication of our whole life to learn, to feel, to share, to gain awareness of how racism lives in our bodies, and to know that only a small part of white supremacy exists “in our cognitive brains. For the most part, white supremacy lives in our bodies. In fact, white supremacy would be better termed white-body supremacy.” 230 And prayer will allow us to become conscious of the fact that sexual, class, and racialized forms of relationships present in various forms of “practices of dominance are simultaneously knitted into the interstices of multiple institutions as well as into everyday life.” 231 These forms of awareness can build local networks of resistance against any form of oppression, moving against governments, and predatory corporations, breaking down existing forms of power, and making use of jurisprudence to distribute land to all. Prayer will become desire that imbues consciousness with soul through practices of poetry, wonderings, walks along rivers and in forests, the restoration of biomes, the healing of animals, and the renewal of the earth. In the essay “There Is No Fire Without Air,” Argentine professor and feminist activist Verónica Gago tells us how the work of transnational feminists struggling across the globe continues to create resistance that takes the form of resonant acts that build and sustain political memory, even in the midst of the COVID- 19 pandemic. As an example of desires embodied in gesture, Gago asks how a collective can organize and use the street. For her, “Whether it is a mobilization, a strike, or an occupation, actions (or their suspension) have a rhythm and composition (a tangle of memory and future) through which air circulates, making sparks ignite.” 232 If we can engage in prayer as action, with rhythm and composition, we can circulate air that will spark a fire. Prayers are then compositions of new responses, new gestures of transformation, fire-starters, and builders of memories both past and future. In this way, prayers do not cede either the space of dreams or political and ecological demands. The desire for our common happiness starts by bringing us closer to the earth, becoming kin of other species, and caring for all there is. To attach prayer to the earth, we must again get close to the ground and claim our belonging where we are, in the earth, where our sense of identity and belonging begin, calling on those who came before us, honoring the Indigenous people whose lands were stolen, and creating forms of life woven in reciprocity and restoration. Our prayers, desires, bodies, cultures, and the earth, all join together in mutual respect, collective flourishing, and common sustainable life. Each prayer breathing life, each desire fostering collective living, each dream being visited by a tree or a river; working for the restoration of dead areas, working for racist laws to be abolished. In this way, we will postpone the end of the earth by creating new sustainable worlds on Earth. Airton Krenak, a leader of the Krenak Indigenous nation in Brazil, says in Ideas to Postpone the End of the World, “My provocation about postponing the end of the world is exactly that I can always tell one more story. If we can do that, we will be postponing the end.” 233 Surely prayers cannot do it all, but they can provide a small space in which stories can be retold, and where we can respond to the world’s catastrophic destructions by desiring a new life—until we are able to attend to our dreams and until dreams are transformed into a life lived beyond ourselves. Dreams made of trees, plants, animals, stars, rivers, mountains, and every human being. If we understand—fueled by dreams made of trees, plants, animals, stars, rivers, mountains, and every human being—that our life is deeply involved, affected by, and utterly entangled with every human and non-human form of life, we will discover that our mode of living has limits. We will then make use only of what our local portion of the earth can provide. We will take care of our gardens, our animals, our rivers, our trees, and our oceans. If we pray and desire and dream with a more expansive form of life, we will care for the collective and the common good and will not become trapped by the demands of the individual. Prayer, desire, dream, action, and wondering together can enable us to find a freedom we have not yet fully lived, because only a few have been able to experience it thus far. We cannot take freedom for granted. As Dunker writes about freedom and the work of happiness, Before, it seemed (that freedom was) free and without cost, but now, its absence appears to suffocate us. This is the great lesson that the worst moments (of history) leave for us: self-criticism and shame are better companions for writing history than guilt or hope. This morale of resistance is important so that we may dream of a happiness that is not divine merit or grace received from magical godparents, but that can, however, be taken from us by tyrants of occasion. Happiness is a precious and rare encounter, not a state of bliss. It is an achievement and a task for each one, just like the lesser happiness and morale of the survivor: happy to be alive. This too shall pass, says the Jewish saying. 234 Through prayer a paradoxical movement takes place in our desires: we must give up our desires at the end of the world and live into the desire for the present, for the arrival of a new world. We must desire at the end of the world with our bodies attuned to the small voice that speaks from places we are not used to perceiving. We can be grateful for what we have wherever we are as a way of pushing our way forward without being destroyed by systems of fear, debt, poverty, destruction, insecurity, and death. From out of mourning and grief, we will move with gratitude into more expansive forms of life and renewal. And we will be prepared: So when you wake up to life, next time, step carefully, because the weight of your happiness is part of the dream for all of us. 235 Prayer is dreaming. May we awaken to a world that is altered by our prayers, and prayers altered by our dreams. 214. Berry, Standing by Words, loc. 104, Kindle. 215. See the introduction and the reference to Guimarães Rosa. 216. Danowski, “Não tem mais mundo.” My translation. 217. Danowski, “Não tem mais mundo.” 218. Danowski, “Não tem mais mundo.” 219. In chapter 5 of Donde aterrizar, Latour writes, “If until the 1990 s modernization could be associated with progress, emancipation, wealth, comfort, luxury and, above all, rationality, the ferocity of deregulation, the explosion of inequalities and the abandonment of solidarity, on the other hand, have made modernization an arbitrary decision made in favor of a few. The best of worlds became the worst.” Latour, Dónde aterrizar, loc. 286, Kindle. 220. See Osnos, “Doomsday Prep for the Super-Rich,” and O’Connell, “Why Silicon Valley Billionaires Are Prepping.” 221. Wall, “Billionaires Wanted to Fund Private Mars Colony.” 222. Latour, Dónde aterrizar, 293. 223. Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Penguin, 1996 ), 31. 224. Carvalhaes, “Pedagogies of Cruelty.” 225. Césaire, Return to My Native Land, 60. 226. Lloyd, “The End of the World.” 227. Gramsci, Prison Notebooks, 276. 228. Dunker, “Como encontrar a felicidade.” 229. Augustine of Hippo, Letter 130, chapter 9. 230. Menakem, My Grandmother’s Hands, loc. ix, Kindle. 231. Alexander, Pedagogies of Crossing, loc. 4, Kindle. 232. Gago, “There Is No Fire without Air.” 233. Krenak, Ideias para adiar o fim do mundo, locs. 19 – 20, Apple Books. 234. Dunker, “Como encontrar a felicidade.” 235. Dunker, “Como encontrar a felicidade.” EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.