9 Praying with Each Other during Infected Holy Week COVID- 19 and the Possibilities of Our Resurrection A s I write, we—all of us, around the globe—have become immersed in the novel coronavirus pandemic and the ravages and upheavals brought about by COVID- 19. As it happens, the pandemic’s initial spread around the planet nearly coincided with the beginning of Lent. As we found our bearings and rethought our religious practices, hoping to stay faithful to the gospel and attentive to this new situation, Holy Week loomed. What then, of that holiest of weeks, the heart of the Christian liturgical year, in this destabilizing new era? This chapter is a prayerful way of revisiting Holy Week in the presence of COVID- 19, a meditation from a theological, social, and ecological perspective. How can we be more aware of the ways we must live in this time and the ways in which we can and must pray? This is a time for praying a prayer that has not yet been prayed before, yet in the setting and spirit of our eternal truths and ancient liturgies. Holy Week is a time of intensified prayer. Holy Week begins like every birth, with a prayer that has exclamations of joy and shouts: Hosanna! The utopia of a new time has arrived! As we approach this heightened liturgical period, we prepare the way with palm for what is coming. As a Latin American liberation theology song says: “God calls us to a new moment... alone, isolated, nobody can move.” And here we are: alone, isolated, not able to move. This Holy Week is infected by COVID- 19 and is drastically changing our ways of being in the world. It also is a call to us to change our prayers and the ways we pray. As humanity, it seems that we have entered into the weeks and years of our last days. “Our house is on fire,” 157 the young Norwegian climate activist Greta Thunberg keeps telling us. The ecosystems are becoming disrupted and their many forms of equilibrium being destroyed. The ways in which the virus is accelerating, shifting, hiding, creating strange effects, and throwing us for a loop clearly shows how little we can control it. The presence of COVID- 19 is like the arrival of Palm Sunday, but they appear to have two different outcomes: one—for we know the end of that story—can signal resurrection. The other may be preparing us for a calamity without redemption. Is this new infection a way into life, or should we ask, like the anthropologist and sociologist Bruno Latour, “Is this a dress rehearsal?” 158 If we do not stop our collective march toward death, what is coming after this is worse: frightening, unprecedented, and totally unknown. Just like COVID- 19, the disarray of all ecosystems will be uncontrolled, and we will have to cope with Good Fridays and Holy Saturdays without end, without an Easter Sunday. This infected Holy Week can be a parable of our time right now. In the gospel story, what we now call Holy Week starts with people preparing the way for Jesus to come. Then Jesus gathers with his friends, washes their feet, and shares with them a full meal. And then something starts to go really wrong. Jesus goes to Gethsemane. He is scared of death and scared to death. The story goes into a spiral of death and decomposition, not just of a human body, but of dreams and social threads. Jesus is betrayed, given over to the state, which mercilessly kills him. He descends into hell—and then a different life begins to take shape. Jesus’s resurrection resurrects others; angels appear to the women who went to take care of Jesus’s body; Jesus appears to some disciples. He is risen! The rest, as we know, is in us under the power of the Holy Spirit. Our present Holy Week is fully infected with the coronavirus, which historian and psychoanalyst Phillipe Sansonetti called “the sickness of the Anthropocene,” 159 the presence of humans encroaching on nature and ripping it apart. Why on earth did this happen to us? We thought that we were celebrating life as always. Nothing was going terribly wrong until everything went wrong. We were thrown off our tracks and we are now in astounding disarray. The social filaments holding our life together are unraveling and we can see more clearly their already existing weaknesses. The limitations of our power are glaring. Our patterns of life were already sick; their forms of production were killing fish in the seas and animals on the earth. It has long been this way, but now we cannot avoid seeing it. We can even smell it. We can feel it. We are realizing that we have betrayed our own selves by destroying the earth. The social, economic, cultural, and political apparatus of death cannot hide any more. We are encountering a pain hitherto unknown, a numbness we cannot control, and many sincere questions within ourselves and around us about why all of this is happening. The main image and theological idea I carry into this infected week is that the earth was put on the cross, the animals were placed on the cross, the vegetable and mineral world were all placed on the cross, along with the bodies taken away by COVID- 19, especially the people of marginalized communities, the poorest ones. The difference in this infected Holy Week is that we are not assured of resurrection anymore. We might all descend into hell without the hope of seeing the light of the new day. Unless we rise early in the day like the women and prepare the way to see a new life, we will miss the possibility of resurrection and will not be able to listen to the angel announcing to us that a new way of life is possible. There will be only a perfunctory repetition of rituals without justice. Marc Ellis asks, “Should we put our rituals on permanent suspension until there is justice? Will we hold on to a piety that does not relate to the pain of the world?” 160 What are our prayers for? So here it is: a possible journey through Holy Week with COVID- 19. Palm Sunday The palm branches—which, in some countries and regions, are from other types of trees or shrubs—should be an exterior sign of an inner prayer. They are also sign and signal of the inbreaking of the love of God into the world, the perennial flowering or greening plants announcing that the realm of growing things is there for us if we live in reciprocity with them: they give us what we need to live and we give them space, care, freedom. On Palm Sunday we must walk outside of churches in procession, not as a perfunctory ritual but to see that what is outside our church buildings is not detached from the inside. If we want a new world to emerge, we cannot just stay inside. As we process, we enter with Jesus into a new Jerusalem, a place where Palestinians, along with Israelis and sojourners from other lands, flourish like green trees, where Jews, Christians, Muslims, Druze, and others grow together. The problem is that we never know what to do when we are in Jerusalem. We stop short. We celebrate the idea of Jerusalem, we pray about it, and we even move towards it, but we are still so attached to the old Jerusalem of our thoughts—which still houses the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians atop decades and centuries of violence and trauma—that we cannot imagine a new world and its demands. If we are to keep going in the direction of change, we will need to be broken open so we can find the ideas and means to actually live in a new Jerusalem. This new world as a utopia, a new time, comes to us in disguise from those who come from below. Not from a Messiah full of power but a poor prophet trying to tell us that we must change our ways. Perhaps the story of Jesus needs to be recounted in conversation with the stories of Indigenous people and their multiple stories of relations with the earth. But we fall short: we imagine a new world, but then we cannot muster the demands of change that we need to comply with the demands of a new era. For Jesus’s demands are much too high. Who would give everything away in order to follow Jesus? Jesus’s demands present us with a dilemma: Jesus’s sayings are mere platitudes or our ways of living our Christianity are cheap discipleship, sugar-coated religion, empty rituals, psychologized messages, and rationalized beliefs crafted to our demands and possibilities. To follow Jesus is to hold on to the palm branches and break with what we can in order and move forward with what we must, giving up the old worlds in which we lived and our former ways of being. Otherwise, any utopia we sing or proclaim will mostly be a projection of what we want and a mirror of our desires. Palm Sunday should be the announcement of the outbreak of what we truly need, even if it is painful. Palm Sunday is a call to think about and express our joy, yes, but not the entitlement of personal happiness, happiness captured in the forms of individual expansiveness demanded by the Declaration of Independence. Palm Sunday is about how we will live our happiness when we get down to Jerusalem where everybody lives. This is a different happiness: a joy that comes from putting the call of Jesus first and from accommodating our desires to a collective sense of responsibility—a happiness in which everyone has the right to a life with dignity, in a democracy that takes into account not only human beings but the worlds of vegetable, mineral, and animal beings. Our prayers are a celebration, a work, a call for a collective democracy of Earth to come, not only for ourselves but especially for others: for the healing and well-being of all people and of animals, plants, water, mountains, and trees. Even if infected, can we pray for this new world? Tenebrae As we go down into the night, we do not know well how to stay with darkness and pray with the night. It seems that we cannot face our worst fears or listen to our dreams, which makes us play out these fears and not-knowing into destruction and sabotage of our own capabilities and possibilities for transformation. Our prayers do not seem to change us much. We have confused a life of prayer with a life of self-fulfillment. We have confused the desire of God in our prayers with the desires of the world in the form of prayers. We are so confused about who we are and what we truly want that we end up disguising our desires as forms of social demands. These forms of social demand are organized around neoliberal politics and economics that shape our feelings and affections, and we already realize that it is not working. We are sick, depressed, half-employed, unemployed, underemployed, riddled with anxiety, dying without health care. In our confusion, we have never known the limits between the human and the non-human or other-human worlds, and that is the source of our plagues: the entering into a world that does not belong to us. While these spaces are all part of us, we must also have limits and know that many natural places are biomes of other living species and not for us. COVID- 19 is yet another sign of our having moved beyond our limit for consumption, control, and domain. We are descending into heavy darkness. This is not the luminous darkness that Howard Thurman talks about 161 and that is glorious, but a space where there is a thickness of loss, fear, and confusion. So, we arrive at the Tenebrae Service, often celebrated on Wednesday of Holy Week. On that day, the ritual signals that something is going awry. A mixture of light, darkness, and something else is falling upon us and we do not know fully what it is. This Tenebrae Service says that we are in a place of descent that we can’t quite figure out. In this infected era, some of us stay home, some of us will work. Some of us will be hit hard and will die. Others will survive. And many will starve. The wind of life is now filled with something we can’t quite hear. The earth has been changing for a while now. Indigenous people are saying that the skies are different, the trees are responding in weird ways, and the animals are receding. In the service of Tenebrae, what my Brazilian communities call trevas, we are overwhelmed by a thousand laments, not all of which we understand. We could, in this worship service, read Bruno Latour, anthropologist and sociologist, who points us to a certain why of this time in a form of a collective prayer: “Is this a dress rehearsal?” 162 Latour asks. We could add: Are we getting ready for what is coming? A global warming catastrophic series of events is already happening everywhere. Will we continue to be slaves of extractivist corporations everywhere that eat up everything that is Earth: mountains, rivers, soil, underground soil, even the moon? Can we hear it? Can we hear the earth praying? It could be that the earth is telling us: You either go into silence and slowness or “I am about to spit you out of my mouth,” as God said to the church in Laodicea in Revelation 3: 16 —which in this case means we will be kicked out of the earth. Sooner than we imagine, perhaps. So in this service of Tenebrae, we still read the Lamentations of Jeremiah and his offers of consolation without redemption. The lights go dim and the candles are blown out. At the end of the ritual, there is only one candle lit, and then even that one is taken away. There is silence. A long silence. Silence is a profound form of prayer, perhaps the most important—or rather, the most necessary. Perhaps, if we can hear the silence, we may be able to see the luminous darkness within us. We might be able to leave our houses when it is still dark to wait for the first rays of the sun, and in prayer greet both the darkness and the light within us: the darkness within us brightened by the light that also lives within us and the light within darkened by the darkness of who we are. In the Tenebrae Service, we go to a place where the thickness of the unknown will show up, and we will have no idea of the where or who or how of anything. There we will pray: God, I give everything up to you! So we will learn that we cannot control anything. And from there, a beam of responsibility, light and darkness leading the way into the night/light. Maundy Thursday The next day we gather for more prayers, carrying the thickness of this time within us. All we know now is that we need to help those who are suffering, those who are caught in the vortex of demands and exploitations by landlords and CEOs. We remember the poorer ones who cannot hide in their homes, the ones who are suffering domestic violence by partners enraged by their own violence and by the violence of this time, health workers putting their lives on the line for other human beings, fast-food workers who live with the upper classes’ demand for service even though they are exposed to the virus every day, farm workers exposed to the coronavirus and COVID- 19 illness without any protection, harvesting the fields for our nourishment, elderly people who are afraid of being alone and dying alone. All we know today, Maundy Thursday, is that we must turn on the siren of our inner ambulance and go serve somebody. This is our innermost and outward prayer. Today is the day we learn from Jesus that the main symbol of Christianity might not be the cross but the towel, the towel of service. When Jesus washes the feet of his disciples, he is taking the position of the slave who used to wash the feet of the guests at the door before they entered the house for dinner. Today we must serve those who were not invited to dinner. We serve those who do not belong to the list of invitees. Today we soothe hearts filled with anxiety and consumed by fear. Some churches will follow the service with the ancient ritual of stripping the altar. This year we learn that our lives are already stripped: that which was there before was just an illusion of protection, order, and security. We are stripped bare naked, and our hearts are pumping as if outside our bodies, feeling all of the elements, afraid of what is coming. The dinner with Jesus’s disciples was already a place where somebody was going to betray him, as our humanity, in our daily meals and actions, endlessly betrays the love of plants, animals, oceans, fish, rocks, fields, and soil. We are constantly betraying the love of the earth for thirty pieces of silver, for “economic progress.” We say we love the earth, just as Judas loved Jesus. Judas did not actually want to betray Jesus. We do not want to betray the earth. And yet this is what we do. After the betrayal, Judas killed himself and we say a prayer for him, as we must say a prayer for all of us who are destroying our home, our planet. We must change before we also commit collective suicide with our ways of living. We must turn away from our betrayal and say, “No more! We do not want to give away Jesus, or the poor, or the earth!” But we should expect that the state police will come after us and, countering our prayers, proclaim: “Go buy! Keep working! Keep the economy going! You will regret it if you don’t! We will take away your jobs, we will crush your families, you will be desperate, and you will die! We control you! Go now and do what we are telling you! Go kiss the earth goodbye! We will take care of the earth later!” So this Maundy Thursday we leave the service torn between our faithfulness to God, who created the earth and demanded us to care for it, and the demands of politicians and economic corporations who threaten us. Before I left the church this year, I could hear within me Eliane Brum admonishing us: “Capitalism has already stolen our present, it cannot steal our future.” 163 As we continue to pray, still infected, we will continue to pray and find ways to serve those who are infected and in need. Ora et labora! Holy (“Good”) Friday We failed. In everything. Miserably! Our prayers couldn’t do a thing. Our fear of losing the immediate prevented us from caring for the future. Our future was overconsumed by the fear of scarcity. We prayed so much for our individual selves and families that we forgot that our life is much larger than that. We had to betray Jesus, for the police were breathing heavily down our necks. The police state had its boots on our face. It was either Jesus or us. We just couldn’t. It was not our fault. The power system knew too well that Jesus was dangerous and had to use us, those who knew him, to enforce its deadly ways. Jesus also knew all too well our ways of being and would say, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” The violent state knew our weaknesses but could see what Jesus was doing with and for us. People started to believe; they were getting ready to change, and to change too much. We could actually break into a new life! We even saw a glimpse of the future in our living prayers! The Empire had to stop Jesus altogether. That is why the spectacle of Jesus’s death was, for the Empire, a necessary and merciless show of pain and violence. With this public act of violence, we are threatened and become afraid of what can happen to us. Jesus’s death points to our death today. It was, as it continues to be, a clear message of the state, alerting people with a different set of civic, patriotic prayers, a different allegiance: “See this? If you do this, if you don’t follow the demands of our economy and the rules of order and progress, this is what is going to happen to you. You have to believe we will care for you. Don’t be foolish!” And the feeling of shame, embarrassment, defeat, ruin, disaster. The cross of Jesus is the death of all of the wretched who also are put on the many crosses around the world. All of the poor, those discarded as things, as trash, all of those who have to work for others to live, all those who cause fear just by existing. 164 They are the threat to dominant elites, the upper classes, the ones with money, chosen by the biopolitics of the state to live well. The cross of Jesus today is found in the jails and walls that are everywhere, in youth put in jail, the stealing of common resources, sick people dying without access to health systems, students without access to education and students carrying massive debts, expensive treatments only given to some by the pharmaceutical companies. Everybody who was abandoned was there with Jesus and everything that came upon Jesus for his death is the death of the world. Jesus cried out in one of his last prayers: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” Abandoned by God, he died. No answer to the prayer was heard. He, and we, were left alone. In the same way, the earth is on the cross right now. We are mercilessly killing the earth and its forms of life. We do not care for the earth in our prayers. We brutalize animals for consumption, we empty the oceans of fish for our consumption, we throw gallons of pesticides into the soil, killing the earth slowly so that we can eat whatever we want in any season of the year, we plant monocultures of soy and corn to feed animals and turn forests into pasture for them and then consume them. We poison the air until we cannot breathe anymore, we pollute the rivers with trash from factories, we pour tons of plastic into the ocean. We decimate wildlife, we extinguish three hundred species every day, we poison grass for the pleasure of our manicured lawns. We need, we want, we desire, we demand! And then, all is dead or dying. Nothing will be left for us humans. There is not going to be enough Earth for all of our greed and desires and demands. If we do not stop, the earth herself will come back to us with a vengeance, showing what we have done and without any chance of forgiveness. We have destroyed all that could give us some possiblity to begin again. Yet politicians and economic corporations do not care. They are building bunkers for themselves and even thinking about how to create conditions of life on Mars when what we have here is extinguished. There is no hope whatsoever. Everything is dead. We are truly infected, more than we ever imagined. Not even prayers are worth anything. It is finished, Jesus prayed. So are we! Holy Saturday: The Great Vigil of Easter We go home—to what, we are not sure. We keep praying as we breathe. But our lives seem to be over. Everything we had was taken away. We cannot hear the birds. The animals have left us. We are bereft, alone, isolated, like a plague that demands us to stay within, both indoors and inside of ourselves. And within is the most difficult place to stay. Jesus our North, South, East, and West is dead and there is no compass to measure our loss, our grief, our displacement. No prayer can console us. We don’t anticipate anything anymore besides the lingering of death in its bitterness and emptiness within us. We lean on our numbness. Perhaps our task now is to find a place where we can be comfortably numb. We compose a symphony of crashed dreams, empty pockets, a drawer filled with torn clothes, a bare kitchen sink, and some leftovers in the fridge that don’t stay cold. Imagine that not long ago we were coming into a new world holding palm branches for new beginnings. Our future, we felt, was such a given. We even believed that we could change the ways of the world, starting with ourselves. We should have known better. The revolution only comes from a place we cannot imagine. Where did it begin? All we know is that it ended and there is nothing on the horizon. We now spend the nights and days not knowing what to do or where to go. Everything we say to each other is muted, or even cancelled as if we must shut down anything that doesn’t look like us. We fear. What is it coming our way? An even worse catastrophe? Our fear is now universalized, even though the politicians are prophesying their words of death towards us as prayers of illuminations: You lost nothing; we are here for you. We will globalize our safety and no pandemic can defeat us. Don’t worry: we have more power to destroy the world than a tiny arrogant virus. Fear not, my flock, fear not. Your president is here for you. I just need a little bit more of power for a time of crisis and we will go back to normal. I promise you! What do you have to lose? The world is already in a mess that we didn’t create. We can’t be responsible for that. But now we are here for you. Trust us! There will be a glorious future for us, one that nobody has ever seen, I promise you. While this proclamation is enticing, and it feels like we have no choice but to follow its invitation or else to remain in our state of abandonment, we are again very confused. We tend toward our old ways of prayer. Perhaps it is at this juncture, the one where the old prayers don’t work, that a possibility lies, our very resurrection. If we follow the Spirit of God who comes from the future to say, “Do not trust any government, but demand a new pathway to a new life.” If we hear that prophetic voice that literally comes from the wind matching the breath within us, we cannot solve problems, but we can create patterns for different ways of creating and producing. We can transform behaviors and give conditions for life to continue where it exists, and new life to appear where it no longer is. But how can we muster the energy to go after our enemies without fear? How do we conquer our fear of the enemy if the fear of death is a sting still infesting our hearts? Who will pray for our strength? We sit down and light a fire for the evening, for it is cold, very cold. The Brazilian Presbyterian liberation theologian Rubem Alves once said that religion is about lighting a fire to keep us warm. With the hope that it won’t burn us, I would respond. Instead, may it just keep us warm, so that we find the strength to change what needs to be changed. At night, the demons come out, fears run loose, and we are afraid of the creatures of night. We are alone and when somebody who can warm our hearts gets closer, in fear we pray: “Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is now nearly over” (Luke 24: 29 NRSV). And in the midst of the warmth, something can always happen. That is the beautiful thing about our collectivity, the human spirit, the power of prayer, that there is always somebody who will pray, a collective of people who will lead the way towards life, even amidst those who push us towards death upon death. Thank God there were the women: Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome. They were consumed by the emptiness of their loss, but they did what they had to do: care for the body of the deceased. “On the first day of the week, at early dawn, they came to the tomb, taking the spices that they had prepared” (Luke 24: 1 NRSV). They had prepared the spices for Jesus’s body and off they went. What they did not know is that they would find an empty tomb and an angel saying something like “What prayers have you prayed?” Or “What are you looking for? Your precious Jesus is alive.” The women go back and tell everyone the good news of a new world, of a new prayer they had never heard. This prayer was announcing a world too glorious to believe; such news was too much happiness to bear. This is the way of our times right now. We are in the midst of death: who would believe that a new form of life is possible from a world drenched in death and dying? Who would believe that a new form of prayer could create a whole new world? Or that a whole new world would create a whole new prayer? Perhaps this virus is Earth-sent, a prayer from God for us. God’s angel might be telling us that we are destroying ourselves, that we are going beyond our limits, that we are upsetting the delicate balance that took millions of years to happen. The angel might be suggesting that we are not praying well. The angel is telling us that COVID- 19 can be a new way into our future if we pay attention and change our ways. The angel is trying to tell us that COVID- 19 is teaching us that we can live as a community in ways that stop the engine of death, productivity, and progress that drives us. Perhaps COVID- 19 is also telling us that if we pay attention and care, a new way of being may be possible. If we have already destroyed our present, perhaps COVID- 19 will teach us to save our future—by changing now. If we look at the earth on the cross, at our collective death, maybe we can find an opportunity of resurrection given to us. Prayers are still possible and needed. Even if we are still fully infected. Can we hear the prayer of the angel of life and death? Easter Sunday Sunday morning comes and Jesus appears to the disciples: first the women, then others. Later, Thomas, like most of us, doubts, but he is invited to touch the woundedness of Jesus. He is transformed. He has a new prayer in his heart. Now everyone is paying attention. The unthought, that which has not been thought before, has given way to new thinking, the dead have given way to life. Prayer can resurrect and create new worlds! With the Argentine singer Mercedes Sosa, we sing, So many times they killed me So many times I died However, I am here resurrecting Thanks I give to misfortune and to the hand with a dagger Because it didn’t know how to properly kill me So many times they erased me So many disappeared To my own funeral I went alone and crying I tied a kerchief knot but forgot later That it wasn’t time yet And I kept singing So many times they killed you So many more you will resurrect How many nights will you spend despairing And at the time of the shipwreck and at the time of darkness Someone will rescue you To go singing Singing to the sun like the cicada After a year underground As a survivor Who returns from the war. 165 And yet, while we hold this belief because of the resurrection of Jesus, we cannot know for sure that we will resurrect if we continue to kill the earth the way we are doing. For we are killing ourselves. We cannot control anything, not even the resurrection, much less the resurrection of Jesus; but in these times the resurrection is not a given anymore, which means that we won’t necessarily resurrect. Nonetheless, even if we don’t resurrect, the earth and other forms of life will resurrect and continue! We need to desire to resurrect and to work on it with all our strength and will so that this can be fulfilled. And every desire that is life-giving demands that other desires die, the ones that have the most difficulty dying. If we desire resurrection, many other desires must die. The desire to have possessions, the desire to be happy by ourselves, to have a life fulfilled with personal properties. All of these desires must turn into a desire for a collective life including the earth. We have no possession, the earth is nobody’s property, and desire for happiness is only possible if everyone else is included in this desire. Can we say a prayer in that form of mutual desires? Are we ready for the resurrection we truly need? Thus, against many forms of Christian theologies, we need to work for our resurrection, and work hard. Grace alone won’t work because it hasn’t worked. Grace alone will work when there is deep work related to it and as a response to God’s grace. If we do not restore destroyed lands, grace alone is nothing. If we do not protect biomes and wild life, grace alone is fluffy stuff. If we do not see animals and the natural world as fundamental to our living, God’s grace is an aberration. We can only see grace afterwards, in our ways of living. As Jesus said, “You will know them by their fruits” (Matt 7: 16 NRSV). We are called today to be transformers of our own ways of feeling, thinking, believing, being, calling forth the arrival of a new time when a new form of economy— oikonomia, the ordering of our (common) household—can be organized. Not with large corporations, but around communities. We will fight for collective land; we will make health insurance universal and will have a universal salary. We will not allow anyone to become extremely rich and we will all share our gifts. 166 Moreover, like the women, we must believe the signs that God is giving us everywhere if we see one coming our way. Then we realize that the spices we prepared are not needed anymore. We need other spices: other forms of thinking and feeling and organizing, both with and against religion. When religion does not serve to change our ways of relating with the earth, it is not worth it; we must throw it out. Anything that is interior or personal or private, that does not come with a sense of belonging with the whole and our responsibilities to the earth, is not worth it. We can throw it out. If we hear the angel of life and resurrection, we will touch the woundedness of the earth and begin to heal our hurts and to restore the earth. Bruno Latour calls us to pray that we can become what he calls “interrupters of globalization,” 167 creating actions, gestures that can eliminate modes of being that are deadly to our present and our future. Thus we will come to know that the earth in all its complexity and diversity is always a sacrament. If Jesus is not resurrecting in and through the earth, the seeds, the oceans, and the trees, is Jesus resurrecting anywhere? How can we give the earth space and time to resurrect herself? How can the advent of COVID- 19 help us to create new rituals that envision new forms of life in reciprocity with the earth? How can our rituals—in this case the ones of the holiest week of the Christian year, but our other religious rituals as well—give us awareness of our human condition in a more expansive way, in deep relationality with the earth? How can these rituals help us mend our destruction, restore what we have devastated, and help us repair our death-dealing desires? Lastly, how can your church pray with those who are suffering, and with the earth itself? How can we work toward understanding what the earth might be, and how can we honor it and act in right relation with it? If we want to start our work as resurrection people, we need to think and decide what we will do. As we finish this infected Holy Week, let us pause and pray-think about the inventory Bruno Latour gave us below. Since the new ways of the world are deeply related to the ways of our prayers, let us consider these questions in terms of our prayers during this time and how Holy Week can call us to an entire holy world and a entire holy year. Latour asks us to think and pray about these questions, first individually, then collectively. 1. What currently suspended activities would you like not to return to normal? 2. Describe why each of these activities seems harmful, superfluous, senseless, or dangerous, and in what way its disappearance, suspension, or substitution would make other activities easier or more pertinent to our right relation with the earth and with each other. 3. Given the suspension of activities, what measures would you suggest to facilitate the transition to new activities that would have to be made by workers, employees, business owners? How can we as churches support those movements, helping the members of our churches to re-enter the society with measures of fairness and care especially for those hurting the most? 4. Which activities that are currently suspended would you like to see start over, grow, or even be totally recreated from zero? Examples: What about thinking life without police in your community? What about producing locally and supporting small farmers? On a larger scale, what about agrarian reform? And no predatory fishing, lower consumption of meat, and limits to energy usage? What would all that mean locally and nationally? 5. Describe why this activity you chose seems positive to you and how it would make other activities that you prefer easier or more pertinent, and why it helps combat those you consider unfavorable. What measures would you suggest to help workers, employees, business owners acquire the skills, means, and tools to restart, develop, or create this activity? How can these measures be related to churches, their members, their missions, and the communities around them? How can we think of new democracy without racism and with the earth and the waters, soil, animals and all species as fully part of our life together? 157. Thunberg et al., Our House Is on Fire. 158. Latour, “Is This a Dress Rehearsal?” 159. Sansonetti, cited in Baschet, “COVID- 19: O século XXI Começa Agora.” 160. Ellis has asked this in conversation with me as well as in social media posts. 161. Thurman, The Luminous Darkness. 162. Latour, “Is This a Dress Rehearsal?” 163. Brum, “O futuro pós- coronavírus.” 164. See the Korean movie Parasite. 165. Sosa, “Como la Cigarra.” My translation. 166. See Tamez, Scandalous Message of James. 167. Latour, Imaginar Gestos. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.