8 Praying with the Earth A reLent Practice—Praying with a Plant —Virginia Cover 141 and Cláudio Carvalhaes Believe me, you will find more lessons in the woods than in books. Trees and stones will teach you what you cannot learn from masters. —Bernard of Clairvaux 142 I n this chapter we will begin to relate to the earth with small gestures: reading, praying, talking to plants. These gestures create a language that hopes to help us shift the ways we relate to the earth. How so? The hope is that we will begin to relate more closely to the earth and move from a certain distance, a utilitarian relation, or even a sense of human dominion over nature, to a relationship that is based on care, responsibility, and reciprocity. From small gestures at home, we hope to move to a place where the earth and its ecosystems and biodiversity, along with the whole human, animal, and vegetal worlds, can coexist in a relation of mutual attention, provision, and equal participation. The earth, Gaia, Pachamama, is our home and without this home we all die. Alas, our earthly condition right now is disastrous. The earth is dying before our eyes and we are dying with it too. We must awaken and start to think about the planet, countries, cities, and back yards from the perspective of the earth: we need to respond to the earth’s pain caused by the over-use of nature for our own desires and the consequent degradation of human life due to the climate calamity. To pray with the earth is to pay close attention to God’s creation and to its suffering. We must learn how to be with the earth in a more conscious, compassionate, and fair way. We must listen to the earth, talk to plants, and relate to them as living creatures who need care just as we humans do. How can we turn away from exacerbating the growing climate calamity? The earth is working to expel us due to our abusive ways of exploiting every form of life. If we Christians are called to be deacons in service to God’s creation, we must change our ways of living and praying. Here are a few moves with which we can begin. First, we must learn that we cannot escape the web of interrelated beings, that we are all interconnected and interdependent in complex, reciprocal ways. We are responsible for the well-being of humans, non-humans, the animal, vegetal, and mineral world. Second, we need to acknowledge that we are NOT masters of nature, that we have no dominion over it, that we do not rule the earth. 143 Third, we must begin to think about the ways in which our local communities are being affected by climate calamity. While we must keep in mind what is happening around the world and fight for the whole earth, we must push our federal and state governments to create laws that protect the earth. In our villages and towns and cities, we must care for the soil and rivers and ecosystems around us: to attend to local farmers, the poisoning of grass, the death of birds, the destruction of wildlife, and lack of care for parks. We must study what provokes such calamities. We must pay attention to what we eat. We are believers in and followers of the incarnation of God in Jesus Christ. Jesus’s incarnation demands attention to our own bioregions, to the voices of ancestors in this land, to the history of the place we live and how we are collectively responsible for the many forms of life on Earth. Fourth, we must relate to what other religions besides our own say about the earth and how we must relate to the earth. Indigenous knowledges will also transform our ways of thinking and relating to the earth. Professor Robin Kimmerer, in particular, shows this through her work. 144 Fifth, the work of the Holy Spirit, coming upon Jesus like a dove, can also come to us, perhaps, through the plants near us. In the same way the body of God comes to us through the grain of wheat and the blood of Jesus in the pressed grapes. How can the whole earth be lifted up in these ways by the Holy Spirit? God in flesh, seeds, leaves, trunks, feather, fish skin, rock, wood, air, water, matter. In order to illustrate and embody some of these shifts in perspective and action, Pastor Virginia Cover has created the following devotional guide, which is to be used during Lent and puts a focus on plants. This resource can also be adapted to other seasons of the church year. ReLent: A Devotional Guide This devotional uses Cláudio Carvalhaes’s written work and the lectures of Robin Kimmerer, Distinguished Teaching Professor and founding Director of the Center for Native Peoples and the Environment at the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry in Syracuse, New York. Virginia Cover, Pastor of Grace Lutheran Church in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania, has put together biblical verses and stories as a pastoral resource for the people of her congregation. This resource can be used during Lent by any congregation or individual. You can adapt or expand it according to your own visions and local needs. A Word about This Devotional Like many devotional booklets, this one engages the reader in spiritual practice and discipline. Like many Lenten devotionals, this one engages the appointed worship readings throughout the season of Lent. Quite possibly unlike other devotional guides for Lent, this one asks you to engage in a spiritual and physical practice you might never have engaged in before. That is a part of its design. While you may feel uncomfortable with this new practice, we encourage you to continue on throughout each day’s discipline, in the hopes that your comfort level and understanding will increase on your Lenten journey to Easter. Setting up Your Devotional Space This devotional is designed with the reader(s) and a live plant together. At Grace Lutheran Church’s Lent Event, every household is given a bulb, planted that day, in the hopes it will grow and bloom around Easter. Whether you received a bulb at this event or not, consider positioning your devotional area with a live plant. (If your bulb fails to sprout, use another live plant in place of it at that point in the weeks of Lent.) Set up your devotional area based on the growing needs of your plant or bulb. Consider a window where the sun can warm the plant and you can see out into the world beyond yourself. Pick a comfortable chair to place in your space, if possible. Perhaps you like to have a candle near when praying, so add that as well. Another ancient practice of prayer involves mindfully gazing into an icon, a visual picture or “window” into God’s activity in the world. Consider how your plant and the actual window could function in the same way for this devotional. Often we use devotionals to read or pray in our hearts (silently). While that is a wonderful practice, this devotional asks you to broaden your discipline to include praying, reading, or speaking out loud. This is the case whether there is another human around to hear you or not. This may be a practice that takes you away from your comfort zone, or at first makes you feel “silly,” but we encourage you to stay with it and see how it changes you over the journey of these forty days. Sunday, the First Sunday in Lent By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you shall return. —Genesis 3: 1 145 Many of us have a disconnected relationship with nature and we relate to nature as “outside things,” as “it,” as “commodities” or “resources” for our use. Is that the only purpose of nature? When God created the heavens and the earth, the plants and animals, trees, and oceans, they were created out of the same ground we were. We are dirt kin, family members held together by the blood of the earth, by the dust to which we will one day return. Over this Lenten journey, we will embark on reconnecting with our long-forgotten earthly brothers and sisters. You will be asked to talk with your plant, with rocks and soil, and to listen to them. It may be very uncomfortable at first, but do not let that discourage you. After all, there was a time when we conversed with these things on a daily basis, ages ago; the Scriptures have captured Eve having a full conversation with a snake! Imagine! There are peoples even now who practice this as a way of life—and they have something to teach us about ourselves that we, to our detriment, have forgotten. Prayer (pray out loud) Holy God, we give you thanks that you breathe life into all living things, though we are but dust. Sustain and renew us, as you sustain and renew the earth, and watch over us all, plants, waters, animals, forests, as we grow. Amen. Monday See, I am doing a new thing! Now it springs up; do you not perceive it? —Isaiah 43: 19 Every Monday this devotional will lift up the practice of attentiveness: of noticing something you did not notice before. Let us begin with looking out your window: what do you see outside that is full of life? Take a moment to jot that list down, and keep it nearby. We will pick it up later. Prayer (pray out loud) Creating God, you have made all living things, and take delight in them. You call everything good. Teach us how to do the same. Amen. Tuesday Then the Lord God formed humankind from the dust of the ground, and breathed into their nostrils the breath of life... and out of the ground the Lord God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food... and out of the ground the Lord God formed every animal of the field and every bird of the air. —Genesis 2: 7, 9, 19 As creatures ourselves, in and of the earth, we are inextricably bound together in a web of life, as organisms deeply entangled in ecological community. Consider that you and your plant are a community—which at its root means you “hold things in common.” We share the air we breathe, the ground from whence we came, the One who gave us life. We share a death, a returning to the ground, and a resurrection. Without coral reefs, we cannot breathe. Without seeds, we cannot eat. Without rocks stable under our feet, we collapse. Without trees, we cannot have water. Without the miraculous balance of the interconnectedness of life, we cannot survive. This is how it was made from the beginning; this is how it still is now. We worship the God who made all things, and gave us the gift of community within creation. Prayer (pray out loud) God of all the earth, you have given us each other to journey with—not only people, but also trees, fish, animals, oceans, and even this plant. This plant is present with me on this Lenten journey. Show me how to be present with this plant on its journey too. Amen. Wednesday Let the heavens rejoice, let the earth be glad; let the sea resound, and all that is in it. Let the fields be jubilant, and everything in them; let all the trees of the forest sing for joy. —Psalm 96: 11 I knew a pastor who would practice his sermons by walking in the woods. He would preach to the trees. Someone once asked him, “Why don’t you practice your sermons by speaking to someone who can listen to them?” He replied, “But they are listening.” Trees are the oldest citizens of the world. We can only stand in life because they stand for us, purifying the air and cleansing the waters that we drink. The Scriptures are full of trees, from beginning to end—the word of God is the “tree of life” from Genesis to Revelation. The Psalms have the most interesting lines of all about trees. They call for the trees to give God praise, as if they have on other occasions. Perhaps they have, and we just didn’t notice. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, may we be like tall trees planted by streams of water, who give their fruit in due season, praising you each day. Amen. Thursday Jesus said, “I am the vine; you are the branches.” —John 15: 5 One of our greatest gifts is technology. You can be connected to a person on the other side of the world in seconds; you can see national and international events unfold in real time. My cousin, a Naval doctor, was stationed in Afghanistan as part of his rotation. He is an orthopedic surgeon by training; he was stationed with two other doctors to serve a large and medically diverse population of service personnel, who came in to his operating room with injuries that were beyond his orthopedic specialty. Technology enabled him to talk with a brain surgeon halfway around the world, and in real time, he could video conference the surgery procedure, saving lives. Technology is also a great curse, because it separates us from our natural family members, our dirt kin. We have fallen into the trap of relating to things and not people, our phones rather than our children, our screens rather than the fields and parks right outside our doors. Our food, our water, are technologically brought to us, such that we do not even think about their sources, or how we depend on their earthiness so that we, who are of the earth, can survive. In an ironic twist, we call this “advancement.” Prayer (pray out loud) We bless you, great God, for the gifts of ingenuity and invention that connect us to so many things. May we never lose sight of what we are truly connected to—the good creation, each other, and you. Amen. Friday When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. —Revelation 8: 1 The church in Lent has often marked off Fridays as a way to observe, in a small way, the realities of Good Friday—the death of Christ. Catholics refrain from eating meat as a way of fasting. Others fast the whole day, breaking the fast at dawn. Silence is often kept in some form, as a way of remembering that even the sun would not give its light and those who witnessed the crucifixion stood by at a distance, silent. Sit in silence with your plant for a period of time. Begin with five minutes. Set a timer because this will feel long to you at first. Let your mind and heart be attentive to how it is growing—what might be happening under the surface, that is active but not yet seen? Prayer (pray out loud) Holy God, you are active in ways we cannot always see. You bring life from what appears to be dead. We give you thanks for life in Christ Jesus. Amen. Saturday And should I not be concerned about Nineveh, that great city, in which there are more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons who do not know their right hand from their left, and also many animals? —Jonah 4: 11 Do dogs go to heaven? Many of us wonder about this question after burying a beloved pet, a near-son or near-daughter in many households. The fact that we wonder about this question, consider it as a possibility that God through Jesus Christ has redeemed the life of even an animal, should tell us something. We long to be connected to every living thing, not only while we have the breath of life, but even when we return to the ground. And yet, we do not live as if this were the deepest truth about ourselves. We treat animals as if they exist only for our consumption, or our entertainment, or our pleasure. What if we relented of this mindset, and turned instead to see animals as co-occupants of this world God so loves? Prayer (pray out loud) God, thank you for the gift of animals. Show me how to live with them and learn from them as you intended. Amen. Sunday, the Second Sunday in Lent Praise the Lord from the earth, you great sea creatures and all ocean depths, lightning and hail, snow and clouds, stormy winds... you mountains and all hills, fruit trees and all cedars, wild animals and all cattle, small creatures and flying birds. —Psalm 148: 7 Robin Kimmerer, a respected forester, botanist, and member of the Potawatomi Nation, joins science’s ability to “polish the art of seeing” with her personal, civilizational lineage of “listening” to plant life—heeding the languages of the natural world. Her bringing together of two worlds opens a new way for us to reimagine a natural reciprocity with the world around us as “a generative and creative way to be a human in the world.” She writes about how humans have forgotten that all living things are our kin. She says we need to relate to plants differently. They are living creatures that deserve to be treated with honor; they are not here only to please us or give us something. They are not only for sale, a commodity or a resource. She suggests calling them a “he” or “she” instead of an “it.” Today, give your plant a name. Decide if you will refer to your plant as a he or a she. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, thank you for the gift of all living things. Thank you for the gift of ________ (your plant’s name). Move your Spirit in both of our lives, renewing us each day. Amen. Monday A shoot shall come out from the stump of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. —Isaiah 11: 1 We have returned to another Monday, and it is time to practice our discipline of attentiveness once again. Look closely at your plant. Do you notice a sprout, or any other sign of new growth? Do you think your plant needs anything at this point in the journey? More or different light? Water? Something else? Prayer (pray out loud) Thank you, God, for my plant ________ (name). Help me to care for him/her in the best way possible, as you care for every living thing on Earth. Amen. Tuesday Let each of you look not to your own interests, but to the interests of others. Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not regard equality with God as something to be exploited, but emptied himself. —Philippians 2: 4 Professor Kimmerer calls attention to the “economy of gifts” that exists in nature. Nature offers us gifts, and we are responsible for the gifts we receive. They are not to be used for profit or to be exploited; they are not ours to take exclusively and as often as we desire, demanding more and more. With the gifts from the earth, we share, we give away, we honor the giver and embrace our responsibility for the earth’s richness and beauty. We return the gifts by respecting, protecting, and caring for the earth just as God cares for us. This is a posture of gratitude, a humbling of ourselves, so that we can bend low and see the life at our feet and all around us. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, I thank you for ________ (your plant’s name). Keep us both in your loving care on our journeys. Amen. Wednesday It is God who sits above the circle of the earth, and its inhabitants are like grasshoppers; who stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them like a tent to live in. —Isaiah 40: 22 This beautiful earth seems like it will be hanging around within this universe forever. Within this earth, we humans live as if we can live and invent life all on our own. Our problem is that we have lived in our world as if the earth were the backdrop of our world, serving this world, making it possible for our world to exist. Many of us humans have lived as if the earth were just a support system for our world. We have seen the earth as a natural resource for our desires, animals as creatures ordained to our appetite or amusement, mountains for our buildings, oceans for our food, the soil for our movement around the world. However, this disconnected way of living cannot be supported anymore. We are coming to a time where the earth is going from the backdrop of our adventure to taking over the central stage of our world. We are coming to a time when the earth will continue but our world will disappear. So we might have an earth without a world. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, I thank you for ________ (your plant’s name). Keep us both in your loving care on our journeys. Amen. Thursday Jesus said to them, “Take care! Be on your guard against all kinds of greed; for one’s life does not consist in the abundance of possessions.” —Luke 12: 15 A word for our times is “extractivism”: everything you can think of has been or is being extracted—fossil fuels, minerals, trees, diverse biomes, waters, ocean species, mammals, and more. Everything in creation has been turned into profit. Landscapes are good if they can be used for profit, for development, for tourism (which means development). Animals are good inasmuch as they can give us something. And yet our way of being in the world, our constant need for development and growth cannot be sustained by the earth. We see this in an unimaginable rate of species extinction, glacier melting, and an unprecedented phenomenon of forced migration. We need a new way of thinking and being in this world, one not derived from endless development and a search for profits, but one derived from our kinship with the earth—from solidarity with every living thing. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, I thank you for ________ (your plant’s name). Keep us both in your loving care on our journeys. Amen. Friday Be still, and know that I am God! —Psalm 46: 10 Sit in silence with your plant for a period of time. Set a timer and mark five minutes. Let your mind and heart be attentive to how your plant is growing—are there things you can see above the surface, at this point? Prayer (pray out loud) Holy God, you are with us, even in the silence. You are with us even in death. We give you thanks for Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen. Saturday I know all the birds of the air, and all that moves in the field is mine. —Psalm 50: 11 I know many of our homebound church members who cannot move easily about their home or apartment; they do not have the ability to come and go as they please any longer, having given up the privilege of driving or lost the ability altogether. They spend much of their day in the same chair, or at least the same room. Many of these same folks find a sense of purpose and life in bird-watching. They secure food or housing for the birds through their family members who come to visit. When I sit with them, they tell me stories about them—what they like to do, with whom they interact, what their best features are. And when one of them is missing, they worry and wonder when they will return. For this pastor, the similarities to the stories they tell me of their own children and grandchildren are striking. Prayer (pray out loud) Gracious God, I thank you for ________ (your plant’s name). Keep us both in your loving care on our journeys. Amen. Sunday, the Third Sunday in Lent A gentle tongue is a tree of life, but perverseness in it breaks the spirit. —Proverbs 15: 4 Using Professor Kimmerer’s view of the natural life around us, from this point on, you are encouraged to speak to your plant, using his or her name. As she says in a recent interview, “We don’t call anything we love and want to protect and would work to protect ‘it.’ That language distances us.” Today, an introduction is where we begin. Here is a sample of what you might say: “Hello ______ (your plant’s name). My name is ______, and today I am trying something very new and different. I thought I would introduce myself to you. I feel a bit odd talking to you, but I want to relate to you differently and see you as a fellow member of the creation of God. Let us pray together: God of all life, I give you thanks for _______ (your plant’s name). I thank you for giving him/her life. Help me to see ______ in a new way, as part of your good creation. Amen.” Monday Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. —Matthew 5: 8 Today we return again to the spiritual and physical practice of attentiveness. Look closely at your plant. Is it getting enough light? Does it need to be turned slightly to aid the light warming it? Is it moving toward the light on its own? Do you think your plant needs anything at this point in the journey? Water? Something else? Close with this prayer, and pray it out loud next to your plant: God of all life, you have given ______ to me, and me to ________. Thank you. Amen. Tuesday Praise God, sun and moon; praise him, all you shining stars! Praise him, you highest heavens, and you waters above the heavens! Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he commanded and they were created. —Psalm 148: 3 Many saints and forebears in the church spoke of the earth differently than we do; they claimed a deep connection with creation, and they wrote and taught its way as life-giving. St. Francis of Assisi is the saint most fondly remembered for his love of animals (his feast day is when churches often hold a “Blessing of the Animals”). He wrote a beautiful canticle—a sung prayer celebrating a world fully interconnected: Most High, all-powerful, all-good Lord, all praise is Yours, all glory, all honor, and all blessings. To you alone, Most High, do they belong, and no mortal lips are worthy to pronounce Your Name. Praised be You, my Lord, with all Your creatures, especially Sir Brother Sun, Who is the day through whom You give us light. And he is beautiful and radiant with great splendor, of You Most High, he bears the likeness. Praised be You, my Lord, through Sister Moon and the stars; in the heavens you have made them bright, precious, and fair. Praised be You, my Lord, through Brother Wind and Air, and fair and stormy, all weather’s moods, by which You cherish all that You have made. Praised be You, my Lord, through Sister Water, so useful, humble, precious and pure. Praised be You, my Lord, through Brother Fire, through whom You light the night. And he is beautiful and playful and robust and strong. Praised be You, my Lord, through our Sister, Mother Earth, who sustains and governs us, producing varied fruits with colored flowers and herbs. Praised be You, my Lord, through those who grant pardon for love of You and bear sickness and trial. Blessed are those who endure in peace; by You, Most High, they will be crowned. Praised be You, my Lord, through Sister Death, from whom no one living can escape. Woe to those who die in mortal sin! Blessed are they She finds doing Your Will. No second death can do them harm. Praise and bless my Lord and give Him thanks, and serve Him with great humility. 146 Speak to your plant again, and tell your plant something about your day. Use the paragraph from Sunday, if needed, to get you started. Close with this prayer God of all life, you have given ______ to me, and me to ________. Thank you. Amen. Wednesday Then God said, “Let us make humankind in our image, according to our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea.” —Genesis 1: 26 Dominion has become a dangerous word. We do not understand the word dominion the way our Scriptures reveal its meaning; we think only of the way the use of the word is in our time today, in a world that has borne witness to colonization and slavery, to human trafficking and poaching. We see dominion as “rule over,” as take what we want, as dominate what is not human, such as the animal and vegetal world, as please only ourselves, as the purview of a harsh master. And yet, when God granted the first humans the task of dominion, it was about service, relation, to relate to every living thing in creation as God relates to us (according to our likeness). The task of giving names to animals was a way to learn with them, be with them, relate with them in a mutuality of mutual living and survival. The Scriptures reveal that God relates to us not in a harsh “ruling over,” but in a nurturing, protecting way—even when we deserve otherwise. In Lent we recall a verse from Joel to reflect God’s character throughout all of Scripture: gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love. We have to move away from dominion and move to relatedness and service, as guarding, protecting, restoring, reciprocating, and caring for what God has called good. Speak to your plant, say you are sorry for the way we have dominated what we were not supposed to dominate. Tell your plant something about your day. Use the paragraph from Sunday if needed to get you started. Close with this prayer God of all life, you have given ______ to me, and me to ________. Thank you. Amen. Thursday Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind: “Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth?... Who shut in the sea with doors when it burst out from the womb?... Do you give the horse its might? Do you clothe its neck with mane?... Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars, and spreads its wings toward the south?” —Job 38: 4, 8; 39: 19, 26 An Indigenous leader once said, “What you call natural resources, we call our parents.” Many people, of various religious groups and spiritual affiliations, call the earth Mother Earth. In our tradition, this conversation God has with Job richly points to the great attention and care with which God formed everything—and still does. God is our ancestor, and Christ Jesus our closest kin. The earth and everything therein belongs to God, and so it belongs to us—as a gift on our journey here. Speak to your plant, and tell your plant something about your day. Use the paragraph from Sunday, if needed, to get you started. Close with this prayer God of all life, you have given ______ to me, and me to ________. Thank you. Amen. Friday The Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before him! —Habakkuk 2: 20 Sit in silence with your plant for a period of time. Set a timer and mark seven minutes. Let your mind and heart be attentive to how your plant is growing. What is changing with your plant? What is changing with you? Prayer (pray out loud) Holy God, you are with us, throughout our lives. Though we change, you are a constant companion. We give you thanks through Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen. Saturday I lift up my eyes to the hills—from where will my help come? My help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth. —Psalm 121: 1 The mountains are immemorial beings of time. They carry the markers of our cosmic life and are witnesses of our history. They are the elders of all of our lives, holders of wisdom and bearers of our stories. Once, a company wanted to extract from a mountain and they asked an Indigenous man. He said, “You cannot just go take things from there. You have to ask the mountain if the mountain agrees with it.” Mountains are the witnesses of biblical history. As I teach my confirmation classes, in a kind of biblical shorthand, “Everything important in the Bible happens on a mountain!” Moses receives the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai, his face shining like the sun; Jesus is transfigured on a mountaintop, shining bright as God’s Son; the disciples are gathered together on a mountaintop and sent into the world to go and baptize and teach everyone about Jesus. Here in Pennsylvania, we are blessed: We can lift up our eyes to the hills and behold the beautiful gift of mountains with the Appalachian Mountains, the Allegheny and Pocono Mountains. Consider all they have witnessed. Speak to your plant, and tell your plant something about your day. Use the paragraph from Sunday, if needed, to get you started. Close with this prayer God of all life, you have given ______ to me, and me to ________. Thank you. Amen. Sunday, the Fourth Sunday in Lent Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil; for you are with me; your rod and your staff, they comfort me. —Psalm 23: 4 The appointed psalm for today’s worship is Psalm 23, a beloved scripture for many. The number of times this psalm has been chosen for funerals is too many to count, largely because it is so familiar to the population as a whole, but also because it is incredibly comforting. In these times that are upon us—as some of us shelter-in-place from a virus we cannot readily see, and others hurry off to work, fighting against time and an enemy hardly understood—this psalm offers us words of hope. Pray the whole psalm with your plant. Give thanks that even in this time of anxiety and fear, God’s still waters provide for you both. God is with us all, and God will comfort us, as the psalmist bravely sings: The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not be in want. The Lord makes me lie down in green pastures and leads me beside still waters. You restore my soul, O Lord, and guide me along right pathways for your name’s sake. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil; for you are with me; your rod and your staff, they comfort me. You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies; you anoint my head with oil, and my cup is running over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Amen. Monday And my God will fully satisfy every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus. —Philippians 4: 19 We have returned to another Monday, and it is time to practice our discipline of attentiveness once again. Look closely at your plant. Do you see buds or blossoms? Do you think your plant needs anything at this point in the journey—more or different light, water, something else? How do those needs differ from your own? Given our shelter-in-place these days, do these needs differ from our own? Pray with your plant God, you are our provider. Open wide your hand and satisfy every living being. Amen. Tuesday Do you not know that you are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit dwells in you? — 1 Corinthians 3: 16 For a few years, a group of pastors in the area would get together every month or so, and participate in a workshop called “Spirit Café.” It was unlike any workshop I had ever been to before, because rather than bringing in a “expert” in a certain field, we relied on the wisdom already present in each of us in the room—and especially the collective wisdom that emerged through our mutual conversation and prayer together. Together we would find creative ways to solve problems, to think differently about worship or Sunday School, or to dream new ways of serving our community. At the end of our time together, we each took a turn offering one word to honor our time together. “Energizing,” “thought-provoking,” “wisdom,” and “bold” were among those regular one-word offerings. Consider the mutual conversations and prayer time you and your plant have shared together. Offer a word now for your plant—a way to honor his/her presence with you all these days. Pray with your plant Holy God, dwell in us, and teach us to honor your presence in all creation. Amen. Wednesday Jesus said, “The water that I will give will become in them a spring of water gushing up to eternal life.” —John 4: 14 The day my daughter was born, a water main in Harrisburg broke, contaminating the water supply to the hospital. All who came to visit her—grandparents and friends—were so conscientious about hygiene, always stopping at the sink in the room to wash their hands, before asking to hold her. Every time this happened, however, we tried to tell them to stop. “That’s not clean!” we said. They thought we were just sleep-deprived! (Which we were!) Everything was so complicated after that water main broke. Her first bath, taken in the hospital, was a boiled one. We take our access to water for granted, don’t we? We take whole bodies of water for granted, really—like our Susquehanna River, a water source for many, which feeds into the Chesapeake Bay, a body of water that sustains everything from marine life to livelihoods. The watershed area for the Chesapeake Bay extends five hundred miles from upstate New York to Virginia. The decisions we make in the entire watershed area—about where we build, where we dump our waste, and whether or not we control run-off (which carries nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment, just to name a few)—all impact the river, which impacts the Bay, which impacts the ocean and impacts our life and so on. Pour yourself a glass of water. Consider where it came from, and how it made its way to you. If you pour it down the drain in your kitchen, where is it going next? Pray with your plant Holy God, you give us to drink the well that is you. May we embody your love for all creation, until it springs up as living water, accessible to all. Amen. Thursday Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb, through the middle of the street of the city. On either side of the river is the tree of life. —Revelation 22: 1 There is a beautiful hymn in our hymnal called “There in God’s Garden” ( ELW # 342 ). 147 The verses recount how this passage from Revelation, a book thought by many scholars to be about the practice of worship, describes the tree of life—Jesus Christ—being offered to us at the Communion table, the fruit of life its gift to us in bread and wine, while we stand in the waters of our baptism—the same waters the author of Revelation terms “the river of the water of life.” On more than one occasion, the Scriptures capture a deep connection between water and trees. Psalm 1 praises the people of God, saying they are “like trees planted by streams of water.” It’s a beautiful image to our ears, but also a reference to the interconnected way trees and water interact. As the “Ten Million Trees” project in Pennsylvania describes it, the landscape can either be a gray funnel or a green filter. Buildings and highways are the gray funnel, that pushes rainwater and toxic run-off directly into creeks and rivers. Trees are a powerful green filter, their roots acting as streamside buffers, holding back pollution from our waterways. Turn on the faucet so you can hear running water, like a river. Creeks and rivers near us like the big Susquehanna River and the Yellow Breeches and Conodoguinet Creeks. If you live near a creek or water source, step outside so you can hear it moving. Offer a word to honor the water—consider its source, vulnerability, and purpose in your life. Prayer Holy God, bless the waters above and below us, and the waters that surround us. Amen. Friday Jesus said, “Let anyone with ears to hear listen!” —Mark 4: 9 Sit in silence with your plant for a period of time. Set a timer and mark off seven minutes. Let your mind and heart be attentive to how it is growing. Is your plant loaded with buds and full of life? Has it already bloomed? What parts of your life or heart are eager to burst with joy? Think back over your whole day (or yesterday if this is a morning devotional for you). Offer a word now for your plant—a way to honor his/her presence with you in that time and place. Pray with your plant Teach us to quiet ourselves and listen for your voice, O God, that we may hear you speaking through all creation. Amen. Saturday Does not wisdom call, and does not understanding raise her voice?... She cries out, “The Lord created me as the beginning of his work, the first of his acts long ago. Ages ago I was set up, at the first, before the beginning of the earth.... When God marked out the foundations of the earth, then I was beside him, like a master worker. —Proverbs 8: 1, 22, 29 Wisdom, or Sophia in Greek, is a personified female in the Scriptures. Often in Christian circles she is closely associated with the Holy Spirit, such that some scholars call her Spirit-Sophia. Proverbs 8 reminds us that Wisdom is God’s master worker, elemental in forming creation, delighting in all God’s creatures—even the humans. Wisdom and wisdom literature, such as the book of Job, remind us God’s ways are not our ways and are beyond human knowledge. Our wisdom is not God’s wisdom; and while Job longs for an answer to his suffering, the truth is that no answer will do. God’s “answer” to Job is a first-class passage with Wisdom herself, on a tour of the creation—a world much bigger than ourselves, a world where we are not the center of the universe any longer; the universe is its actual center. God is the center, not us. Does that give us “understanding,” or perhaps, comfort? I can’t say. I can only say that like many others I know, when I am faced with difficult challenges or overwhelmed by the pain and hurt in the world, standing next to the ocean, with its widening boundaries too far to see; or hiking into the mountains, with their grandeur and size too big to measure against my own, I feel differently about things. Perhaps you can relate. (Take a virtual dive into the ocean with NOAA. 148 ) Think back over your whole day (or yesterday if this is a morning devotional for you). Offer a word now for your plant—a way to honor his/her presence with you in that time and place. Pray with your plant Give us your wisdom, O God, that we may behold the majesty and magnificence of creation, and our place in it. Amen. Sunday, the Fifth Sunday in Lent The dead man came out, his hands and feet bound with strips of cloth, and his face wrapped in a cloth. Jesus said to them, “Unbind him, and let him go.” —John 11: 44 In Jewish tradition, the rabbis write comments or notes to “fill in the gaps” of the Scriptures, and they call it Midrash. According to a nineteenth-century rabbi, Samson Hirsch, who wrote many such notes on the Torah, God gave the Sabbath “so that the people should not grow haughty in their dominion of God’s creation. For on the Sabbath you should refrain from exercising human sway over the things of the earth.... You should return the borrowed world to its Divine Owner in order to realize that it is but lent to you.” Many who follow this teaching of Sabbath see it as a day each week on which they do not transform nature at all; anything that has an effect on nature is not performed—plucking fruit or leaves, planting seeds, anything that transforms the environment. It has the effect, they say, of altering a person’s feelings about holding control over nature. It makes them remember: it is truly only God who does this. The rabbi continues: “Imagine! Sabbath in our time! [This is the nineteenth century, mind you.] To cease for a whole day from all business, from all work, in the frenzied hurry-scurry of our time! To close the exchanges, factories, workshops, to stop all railway services—great heavens! How would it be possible! The pulse of life would stop beating and the world would perish! But would the world perish? On the contrary, it would be saved.” There is an unbinding that happens when we practice Sabbath. It is like the unbinding Jesus calls all those around Lazarus to participate in to remove the signs of death and destruction that still cover him. There is a freedom in pausing to remember who we belong to and who is really in charge of this world—our God, who made us and everything that lives from mere dust. It is life-giving to reconnect with our own beating hearts in the moments of silence, and to consider that our hearts only beat because God’s breath is in us, because God is that much a part of us. It is a resurrection of sorts to reflect, if only for a moment, that God is that much a part of every living being in all creation—even those plants and trees, and those people, who have returned to the ground. Celebrate the Sabbath today by taking up a practice that will remind you to seek balance with the natural world. Unplug electrical appliances you won’t use today, wear clothes made of Earth-friendly materials; instead of driving, take a walk; and so on. Pray with your plant Unbind us, Gracious God, and free us from ourselves, that we may unbind the earth. Amen. Monday The flowers appear on the earth, the time of singing has come. —Song of Songs 2: 12 We have returned to another Monday, and it is time to practice our discipline of attentiveness once again. Look closely at your plant. Is it full of life and blooming? Is there any other living being coexisting with your plant? A microorganism, a moss? What gift might it be giving to your plant at this time? Pray with your plant Thank you God for my plant, _______ (name). Help me to care for him/her in the best way possible, as you care for every living being on Earth. Amen. Tuesday Now John wore a garment of camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey. —Matthew 3: 4 Insects are fascinating and fundamental to our living; without them we would perish. Among other things insects are vital as pollinators, and almost all plants rely on them for reproduction; insects are also food for other animals, especially for birds. Insects control pests and maintain the exact balance to our necessary biodiversity. Insects also aerate soil with their droppings, folding nutrients into it, and opening tunnels for water to irrigate it. Many decompose garbage, carrion, and other dead matter. Insects also serve as antibacterials, analgesics, anticoagulants, diuretics, and antirheumatics. We are made of the same dirt they are, and we praise the same God who gives life and breath to each of us. They are as important to the circle and sustenance of life as we are. Explore an insect-friendly activity in your yard. Maybe you catch and release bugs using a butterfly net; or, on a sunny day, place an open umbrella upside-down under a leafy, low-hanging branch. Shake the branch like you mean it—then identify what lands in your umbrella with an insect book or online. Pause to look at these precious beings. Give each a name and say a prayer of gratitude for their work among us. Prayer God of unending creativity and love, you have created all these insects, those we know and don’t know, those we love and those we are afraid of. Thank you for every little creature: spiders, worms, crickets, locusts, ants, beetles, bees, and butterflies. May we never take them for granted. Amen. Wednesday When you enter the land that I am giving you, the land shall observe a sabbath for the Lord. —Leviticus 25: 2 Here’s a mind-blowing fact: there’s more carbon in soil than in the atmosphere and all plant life combined. That’s not a big deal when left to its own devices. But when soil gets disturbed—like it does when you convert a forest into cropland—all that stored carbon gets released into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. That’s one reason why deforestation alone is responsible for eleven percent of all global greenhouse gas emissions. (Another reason is that forests and grasslands are natural carbon sinks. Clearing them reduces the planet’s capacity to remove carbon dioxide from the air.) The microbes in soil can also create greenhouse gases when they come into contact with fertilizer. Synthetic fertilizers revolutionized how we feed the world, but they release a powerful greenhouse gas called nitrous oxide when broken down by those microbes. Natural fertilizers like manure aren’t any better because they release greenhouse gases as they decompose. Ecological agricultural practices need more attention and support in our world. Many such practices are well-known at this point, but many markets do not support or subsidize the changes needed, or the additional products produced using varying crop rotations. The buy-local movement, supporting a CSA, 149 and visiting your farmer’s market are important ways you can support small-scale growers right here! Go outside and take a scoop of soil. Hold it in your hands. Consider the life it holds, the microorganisms at work every second, and consider how much we have disturbed and misused this part of God’s good creation over the centuries. Say this prayer with the soil Lord, let our hearts be good soil, open to caring for this precious gift. Amen. Thursday The birds of the sky nest by the waters; they sing among the branches. —Psalm 104: 12 I used to think I could hear music well. When practicing the piano, for instance, I used to think I could hear all the notes and whether I played them correctly. That was until I went to college in music, and learned about ear training, the practice of listening attentively to something over and over until you hear tones and overtones you never “heard” before. By the time of my senior recital, I could hear subtleties in piano performance I could barely describe. And yet, the farther I move away from that time of regular ear training, the less I can “hear.” I thought of this when reading a recent post from a friend of a friend under quarantine in Wuhan, China. She writes, on day forty-eight, “Right now, I hear the birds outside my window on the twenty-fifth floor. I used to think there weren’t really birds in Wuhan, because you rarely saw them and never heard them. I now know, they were just muted and crowded out by the traffic and people. All day long now, I hear birds singing. It stops me in my tracks to hear the sound of their wings.” Go outside or open a window and listen for the birds. It may take a few minutes to focus your hearing on their sounds, depending on where you live, and depending on how trained you are to hear their singing. Pray with your plant Incline our ears to hear your voice, Holy God, through the music of the birds. Amen. Friday Jesus said to them, “Come away to a deserted place all by yourselves and rest awhile.” —Mark 6: 31 Sit in silence with your plant for a period of time. Set a timer, and mark seven minutes. Let your mind and heart be attentive to how your plant is growing. As your plant is blooming and changing, what is blooming or changing in you? Offer one word as an answer to this question, even if it is “unknown.” Say it out loud to your plant. Offer a space of silence for your plant to answer as well. Pray with your plant Holy God, you are with us, in the silence, in the changes of our lives—both now and far into the unknown future. Amen. Saturday Let my prayer rise up as incense before you, a lifting up of my hands, as the evening sacrifice. —Psalm 141: 2 (taken from our Evening Prayer Service) Smell is one of our senses, one that serves for so many reasons. Our smell attracts, repulses, creates memories, relations, and marks our culture. Smells are everywhere. Plants and flowers have a whole array of aromatic scents. There is no scent that is the same among the flowers, and there can be sweet, musty, spicy, or fruity odors that serve as signals for pollinators, offering them rewards. Plant scents attract some insects and repel others so they can survive in a chain of relations and cross-pollinations. Paul writes in 2 Corinthians that believers are the “aroma of Christ to God” for each other—a fragrance of “life to life,” as he describes it. As all four Gospels tell it, when Mary anointed Jesus’s feet at Bethany, a fragrance of the perfume (and of his impending death) filled the whole house. Perhaps the aroma of living beings in creation, and their diversity of fragrance, can remind us of God’s gift of life for each and every one of us. Pick one thing in your kitchen to smell. (Take turns smelling its aroma.) Then offer a word to honor the scent. Prayer Holy God, we give thanks for the fragrance of Jesus’s love and mercy to us all. Help us to learn the smells and scents of your Earth, that we may be the aroma of love to the world. Amen. Sunday, Palm Sunday Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to Jesus, “Teacher, order your disciples to stop.” He answered, “I tell you, if these were silent, the stones would shout out.” —Luke 19: 39 – 40 As the Gospel writers describe it, Jesus’s triumphal entry into Jerusalem on this day had everyone shouting. And not just everyone, but every living being—apparently, even the rocks joined in the praise of the one who comes in the name of the Lord. “Hosanna!” they shouted. When I was around twenty years old, I attended the retirement service for the beloved senior pastor in the congregation. He had served for many years; he was a faithful preacher and teacher and well-respected by the community. I don’t remember his sermon in its entirety, but I remember clear as a bell him saying, “I believe Jesus died for every person under heaven. I believe Jesus died for every rock, every tree, and every stream.” At first I thought: oh, I’m glad he’s retiring, because he’s losing it. How could Jesus have died for the trees and rocks? What could they possibly need? But there was something about his confession of faith that I could not easily dismiss; that had me thinking about it twenty years later. Perhaps it was this passage from Luke’s Gospel. Perhaps it was asking the question in these times, with this ecological and energy crisis: Who is it that longs for redemption, restoration, and renewal? Who is it that would boldly shout “Hosanna!” (which means, “Save us!”) that day as Jesus rode a donkey into Jerusalem? Perhaps even the rocks would shout out. Go outside and get a rock. Bring it in and set it with your plant as a companion. Pray with your plant and rock God you are our rock of ages. I give thanks for this rock, a timeless witness to your majesty, and a companion to us all. Amen. Monday in Holy Week Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. —Matthew 5: 8 This is our last Monday together in Lent, when we have taken up the practice of attentiveness. By now I imagine your own practice of attentiveness toward your plant is regular and heightened. Go outside and practice attentiveness with the nearest tree or shrub. Look closely. What do you see there? Pray with this tree or shrub Holy God, open the eyes of our hearts, that we may see you, alive and renewing all creation. Amen. Tuesday in Holy Week Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. —Matthew 5: 4 Our time is filled with loss. Many of us who have been or are still sheltering in place have endured many recent losses. Holy Week is appropriately named for us because it is a holy time set apart to grieve our loss and to look expectantly for resurrection to come among us. The earth has suffered loss at our hands. The way award-winning author Dr. Seuss describes the cutting of the last tree in his book The Lorax 150 captures the poignancy of the loss we create: “From outside the fields came a sickening smack of an axe on a tree. Then we heard the tree fall. The very last Truffula Tree of them all.” A sickening smack. What this children’s book does so well—and even more so, the recent movie version—is to give us permission to mourn these losses at our hands: to grieve as a people, to grieve with the earth itself. (Watch this portion of the movie, a scene of grief, and discuss it.) Go to any part of the landscape near you that has been altered by human hands: a tree that has been cut off, a house that has been erected, a road that has been paved. Offer a blessing for loss. Pray with this place Into your hands, O merciful Savior, we commend this place. Acknowledge, we humbly beseech you, a _______ (name of the landscape or planting) of your own making, an integral part of your good creation, a place of your merciful redemption. Amen. Wednesday in Holy Week By the breath of God ice is given, and the broad waters are frozen fast. —Job 37: 10 When President Taft created Glacier National Park in 1910, it was home to an estimated 150 glaciers. Since then the number has decreased to fewer than thirty, and most of those remaining have shrunk in area by two-thirds. Research scientists predict that within thirty years most if not all of the park’s namesake glaciers will disappear. “Things that normally happen in geologic time are happening during the span of a human lifetime,” says Daniel Fagre. “It’s like watching the Statue of Liberty melt.” Everywhere on Earth ice is changing. The famed snows of Kilimanjaro have melted more than 80 percent since 1912. Glaciers in the Garhwal Himalaya in India are retreating so fast that researchers believe that most central and eastern Himalayan glaciers could virtually disappear by 2035. Arctic sea ice has thinned significantly over the past half-century, and its extent has declined by about 10 percent in the past thirty years. NASA’s repeated laser altimeter readings show the edges of Greenland’s ice sheet shrinking. Spring freshwater ice breakup in the Northern Hemisphere now occurs nine days earlier than it did 150 years ago, and autumn freeze-up ten days later. Thawing permafrost has caused the ground to subside more than fifteen feet in parts of Alaska. All over the world massive ice fields, monstrous glaciers, and sea ice are disappearing, fast. 151 Place two or three ice cubes on a plate or bowl near your plant. Sit in silence as they melt. As you witness the melting, keep silence. Give yourself permission to grieve this death—it is a part of the earth, a part of God, and a part of you. Close with this prayer Gracious God, we grieve what we have become, and how we have wounded the frozen waters in this world. Teach us to heed these warnings, and show us a new way to live. Amen. Maundy Thursday And when Jesus had given thanks, he broke it and said, “This is my body that is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” — 1 Corinthians 11: 24 The Words of Institution, as we practice them, do not come from the Gospel witness, but from Paul’s letter to the church at Corinth. Every time we eat the bread and drink the wine, we “proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes.” This is important, when we consider that Jesus’s meal with his disciples took place in the course of a regular meal, using regular everyday table food. The bread was passed around first, as the Synoptic Gospels recount it, and then they ate the bulk of dinner. “After supper, he took the cup,” and passed around the table wine—the cheap, everyday wine his disciples had with every dinner, that their neighbors had with every dinner, that everyone in Galilee and Jerusalem who did not live in a palace had with every dinner. In this same way we can make every meal we eat—every ordinary, regular meal—holy. Do we consider the food we receive on a daily basis holy? Do we treat it as such, giving thanks for the fields and the animals that gave their lives for our sustenance; giving thanks for the workers—mostly migrants in our country—who brought the food to our table? Do we consider the source of our food, whether it is at the Communion table or our dinner table—and do we measure our food production practices, our treatment of the fields, our privatization of seeds, our blindness to the humanity of workers—to be “in remembrance of me”? How would that change things? Plant a seed today. Give thanks for the power it has to teach you about rebirth—for the way it proclaims our Lord’s death as a way to life. Close with this Buddhist practice: Look at your own plate of food and repeat these phrases: In this food I see clearly the entire universe supporting my existence. Amen. Good Friday When it was noon, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon.... Then Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last. —Mark 15: 33, 37 We have come to the last Friday in our devotional, a Friday we call “Good.” In ancient times this day was called the “Triumph of the Cross.” English speakers now call the day Good (originally “God’s” Friday) because we know the end of the story. This Friday will carry us through every graveyard we know to resurrection. But first, we will walk through the darkness. Darkness in our racist culture is akin to evil. We associate Black and Blackness with sinister things; we are taught to fear the night and the shadows. The Scriptures have a completely different perspective. The psalmists ask God to “hide [us] in the shadow of your wings,” for only there we can live in safety. God tends to show up at night, working literal miracles—whether that is blessing Jacob to be Israel, or bringing tidings of great joy to shepherds out in a field. Christ gives his life for us in the darkness, and rises on an early Easter morning, in the darkness—before the dawn. Darkness is a blessing, enfolding us like the very arms of God, bearing promise and blessing all at once. 152 Turn down the lights, and sit in the darkness with your plant for a period of time. Keep silence. Close with this prayer: Holy God, we give you thanks for the darkness. May we behold its goodness and blessing upon us. Amen. Holy Saturday He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. —Matthew 3: 11 The pinnacle of the church’s year is the Great Vigil of Easter. As all the light is extinguished from the church’s worship on Good Friday, the service of Vigil begins outside, with what is called the “new fire”—a live fire in a fire pit. We light the Paschal Candle from this fire, marking a new beginning, quite literally, with the new year’s numbers (this year 2020 ). We bring that fire, that new life, into the worship space again, among the people, and start again. This devotional and theme of reLent has been a time for us to look at how we are living in the world, how we are living with each other, and how we are living with the earth. We have walked a path of self-examination; we have begun to learn how to see and hear all living beings—from butterflies to soil to trees to rocks to rivers—as belonging to God, and as speaking God’s truth to us that we desperately need to hear. When we light the new fire this year for the Vigil, may we covenant to start again in all kinds of ways. May we mark a new beginning for ourselves and the earth, asking the question with Saint Augustine, “What do I love when I love my God?” And providing answers we never considered before. If possible, light a fire outside and gather around it. (If not possible, light a large candle inside or one with multiple wicks.) Share what you and your family have learned these past weeks. Share your hopes for the year ahead. Close with this prayer: Great God, on this night you brought all creation from death to life. Bring us from the ways of our past to your ways of life, for our future. Amen. Resurrection of Jesus, Easter Sunday Supposing Jesus to be the gardener, Mary said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.” Jesus said to her, “Mary!” —John 20: 15 Isn’t it interesting that of all things in this world, the resurrected Christ would be mistaken for a gardener? That Christ Jesus, who overcame death and hell, who freed us all from sin and the grave, would be found walking among us, talking with us, in the garden of all places? We recently had to cut down a tree in our yard, a beloved English Walnut, probably a hundred years old or more, because of disease. The stories that tree had; the things it had witnessed—I can’t even begin to imagine. It was a sad day when it came down, when the wood was chopped and hauled away, when even the stump was ground up. But it was not the end of the tree—it is mulch now, holding in water for another tree or plant; and as it decomposes, it will fertilize the ground on which it sits, and it will change the makeup of that soil, and it will nurture another plant that springs forth. Perhaps your resurrection project might lead you to plant a garden. 153 It reminds me of an article I read about a pastor who helped his congregation move to natural burial—laying their dead to rest, without intervention and chemicals, in the woods behind the church. While many resisted at first, over time they told just how much they learned about the connection between death and rebirth from the experience; about resurrection now, and in the time to come. But who they learned from, really, was the earth itself; from the trees under which their beloved dead were planted. From the wind that rustled the branches, as they lowered loved ones into the ground, the wind inviting them to lean into it, holding them up in their grief. And it was from the master gardener—Christ Jesus—who so loves even the dew on the roses, even us, even beyond the grave. 154 Remember our exercise back on Monday of the first week in Lent. You looked out the window where your plant resides and jotted down anything you saw outside that was full of life. Look again out the same window. Consult your old list. Would you add anything you did not see before? Was it because it was not there before, or because you did not consider it to be full of life until now? Prayer: Continue, O God, to create in us a new heart and a new way to see your world. Amen. • • • Here is a prayer to the earth that I, Cláudio, continue to pray: Dear Earth, Gaia, Pachamama, You who are and have always been my home, my solace, my ground. I am made of you and of the stars. Your water that runs in my body runs in your rivers and oceans. I have grown up because of you. I have eaten what you gave me to eat. I have drunk what you gave me to drink. I am now dressed in clothes that just the other day were a flower in the field. I must confess that I have been estranged from you. I never paid attention to you. I have never talked to plants as if they mattered, I have never listened to the birds as if they were singing my song, I never paid attention to your pace and movements, I never stopped to hear the relation between you, the oceans, the moon, and the planets. How can I teach my children to care for you if I don’t know how to care? How can I tell them to listen to you if I don’t even know where to start? Ah, I learned that I had to listen to God, but God was never in you, fully. So I always went elsewhere. For God was always elsewhere. Only partially in you. And now I can’t hear either God or you. Perhaps I hear you asking me who we are as humanity without you. How much humus of that humus-humanity are we? The “we” of my theology was always the “we” of myself and God and other humans. The philosophy behind my theology was a Greek one establishing a duality between transcendence and immanence. Descartes made me think that I am what I can think. Kant distinguished things and beings from the imprecision of thinking itself. I think that I am a being and that whatever does not think is a thing—and therefore just a resource. I remember that Indigenous leader saying to us non-Indigenous people: “What you call natural resources, we call parents.” The duality of transcendence and immanence, culture and nature, human and animal-vegetal, it all must die. Death to humanism! Death to modernity! Death to development and any economics of growth! Death to everything that tells us that we need something that cannot be found where we live. Dear Pachamama, I have been in confessional mode here. But I am trying to find a subjectivity that implodes the objectivity of our thinking. When I wondered about my subjectivity, I learned that I had to go to therapy to listen to my own voice, which was truly important, but I never imagined that I could also listen to the mountains, the zebras, the worms, the butterflies, the trees, the bluebirds, the bees, the sunflowers, and the squirrels as if I were also listening to myself. So now I wonder with a sense of subjectivity that is foreign to my own being. If 25 percent of myself is made of trees, 90 percent is made of water, and 100 percent made of stars, I feel now that these many new universes, pluriverses, are waking me up to write new verses in my body. And my heart rejoices. But I have so many questions to you, dear Gaia: How do I learn to hear the undercurrent of waters within you? How can I see the rivers that run above me between the trees? How can I learn to hear your desires and your hopes? How can I learn to mend and restore where you are hurting? How can I make you be a fundamental voice to the constitution of myself but also of the constitution of every nation? I must confess that I have lived as if you almost did not exist, as if you were there just to give me everything and my job was to develop, grow, expand, conquer, dominate. But now that we are destroying everything and our future is going to be completely compromised, we cannot not perceive you anymore. So I want to have a heart that is near yours. I want to have a heart that can hear your heartbeat as the heartbeat of the body of God. I pray I learn to see the Holy Spirit in the quaternity of the air, earth, wind, and fire! May I learn that everything is in you and that my work is to wonder. May the brilliance of the stars, the worlds and universes without ends make me wonder and exclaim “Wooowww! Aaaahhh! Wow! My goodness! Look at that, listen to it!” Every day. May every plant be my family that I love and live for in reciprocity and care. My sacred text will be: Our vegetable love should grow Vaster than empires, and more slow. 155 So please, dear Earth, help me listen to you. Teach me about you and your ways. I want to live and die with you. For as the Scriptures say, “From the dust we come and to dust we shall return.” May my own dust be worthy of your ongoing gift of life and care. May who I am be a gift of reciprocity to you. May the work of my hands be of ongoing restoration and regeneration. May your wilderness be protected, and I become a shield. May I shield you as if I were protecting myself. May your fields go back to full diversity and all the pollinators come and go and flourish throughout the whole earth. May I feel you as I feel myself. No need to be more than myself once I realize that you live everywhere in me, in every cell of my body. You are the deepest kinship I have. May we bee like a bee. 156 I want to be like a bee dancing my way around the flowers. May the oceans be resurrected and the fish live in peace. May the trees live as long as they can. May all of the extinguished species be honored and remembered. May the birds never go without singing. And may I learn their songs so I can sing to you their songs, my songs, our songs. May I learn to listen to you as I learn to listen to God. May I learn to listen to you as I learn to listen to my children. May I learn to listen to you as I learn to listen to myself. May I learn to listen to you as I learn to listen to you. Amen. 141. Rev. Virginia Cover is Senior Pastor at Grace Lutheran Church in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania. 142. Bernard of Clairvaux, Letter 106, 2, quoted in Churton, Early English Church, 333. 143. Listen to Bob Dylan’s song about our relation to the earth, “License to Kill.” See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 4 zP 9 OUNuUk 4. 144. See Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass, and Kimmerer, Gathering Moss. Also see her many videos on YouTube. 145. All Scripture epigraphs/quotes in this devotional are taken from the New Revised Standard Version (NRSV). 146. There are several translations of Francis of Assisi’s “Canticle of the Creatures.” This classic one may be found in Toole, Handbook for Chaplains, 1 3. 147. Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Evangelical Lutheran Worship. 148. See https://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/vr/. 149. Community-supported agriculture (CSA) is a food production and distribution system that directly connects farmers and consumers. In short: people buy “shares” of a farm’s harvest in advance and then receive a portion of the crops as they’re harvested. See, for example, https://www.thespruceeats.com/community-supported-agriculture-csa- 2216594. 150. Seuss, The Lorax. 151. See Glick, “The Big Thaw.” 152. See Taylor, Learning to Walk in the Dark. 153. See the video “How to Start a Regenerative Garden at Home”: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNcSkb 8 uR-s. 154. See the Mormon Tabernacle Choir singing C. Miles Austin’s hymn “In the Garden”: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OcRCa 7 SDhxA. 155. Marvell, “To His Coy Mistress,” 51. 156. The first “bee” is intentional. See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bFB 0 bAX 6 RGA. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.