Introduction Praying With Every Heart I t was my mother who taught me to pray. For her, one cannot live if not through and by prayer. Dona Esther was born on a farm where her parents worked on a field as colonos. A colono is someone who works in a “colony,” a worker who labors in the fields for somebody else for some form of payment, somebody who tries to establish oneself in a country or a territory that is not one’s own. The colonos ’s situation is like that of the immigrants who work on farms in the United States: meager payment, no rights of any kind, and a very harsh life. In a recent conversation with me, she described her life from her birth to the age of nine. Her mother would wake everybody up at 5: 00 a.m., prepare food, and go to the fields with her children: my mother had a little brother and a little sister. She has memories from when she was six years old. When the family got to the coffee plantation in the morning, my grandmother would put my mother, her little brother, and her baby sister under a coffee tree and leave some food and milk for them. My mother would have to take care of the two younger siblings. Sometimes she would have to run and search for her mother in the fields when one of the children would not stop crying. When she was eight years old, my mother taught her little brother to pick up the leftover coffee beans dropped on the ground by the adults and they filled up a sack with them. With the money from those coffee beans, they were able to buy their first shoes, a little dress for her, and shorts for her brother. But before that, my mother’s baby sister got sick one day and the family did not have the money to go to the doctor; the baby died of dysentery and dehydration. Another baby was born soon after, but my grandmother died at the age of twenty-nine, when my mother was nine years old, her brother seven, and her sister two. My grandfather, not knowing what to do and having to support the children, gave them away to families who could raise them. My mother went to school till the second grade. From the ages of nine to seventeen, my mother went from house to house as a maid, baby-sitter, and cleaner. By then living in the city of São Paulo, still working as a maid, she became a member of a local Independent Presbyterian Church and there she met my father. My father, seeing her situation, took her to live with his family. They married when she was twenty. Now, at eighty-nine, she has four children, eleven grandchildren, and seven great-grandchildren. After my mother talked about her childhood, I asked her, “ Mainha, how did you survive it all?” She replied: “It was God. Even when I didn’t know it was.” “But how,” I asked, “did you not get bitter going through it all?” She answered: “It was life, how can I complain? It was very hard, very sad, very difficult; we didn’t have anything. But it was what we had. I couldn’t blame God for my mother’s death, and I understood my father: he didn’t know what else to do. I always loved my parents.” I asked again: “What helped you keep going?” The answer came immediately: “Prayer, my son, prayer sustained my life all the way to this day and will continue to sustain me. Today I live the life of a queen! And I will continue to pray until I go live with the Lord in heaven.” A daughter of parents of various origins, some known and some buried under the forced oblivion of coloniality—Roma, Indigenous, Afro-Brazilians, and Europeans—my mother witnessed poverty and despair vividly. Through it all, she had a heart for the poor that made her radical in her politics. All she wanted was for politicians to help feed the poor because she knew how hard life could be. I remember how she would not allow me to leave the house in the morning before going to school or to work without first praying with her. If I complained that I was late, her prayer would be longer. I had to pray before my day started. That very practice provided me with a sense of preparedness for whatever the day had in store for me. Her praying with me for the world shaped my heart and my desires. Praying was always to be done with somebody or something in my heart. This made prayer never be a lonely endeavor, even when my mother taught me to go pray in my room. In my room, I used to hold in my hands a globe of the world my father gave me and pray and cry over it, asking God to bless people everywhere. That is the framework for prayer in which I grew up and within which I am now developing these essays. Praying is always praying with: my mother, those who are suffering in hospitals, people on the streets, people in prisons, human and other beings in the whole world. This form and content of prayer gave me a daily exercise in how to orient my heart. They freed me from the strictures of liturgical norms and fixed theological beliefs. “Praying with” has always turned my heart to where the world was hurting and made me focus on the needs of others. To pray was like what I see these days with my puppy Amora, who runs toward anyone who is crying and licks them and offers her presence. Like Amora’s reflex, my prayer was also a way of getting closer to someone hurting, licking their wounds, and saying “I am here!” As for the savior complex in my prayers, it diminished with the years. I went from wanting to save the world to being as I am now, a listening presence, praying in deep thanksgiving and weeping together with those for whom I pray. Prayer has also been a way for me to heal my mother’s history and to attend to those like her. It is a way to heal the colonizing and colonized history of my grandparents, who struggled so much to make ends meet and who lost their beloved ones because they did not have money to go to the doctor. Perhaps my life of prayer is my way of offering companionship to those who remain under the coffee trees, not knowing whether their parents will arrive. My prayer was and still is a way of breaking forms of coloniality, the powers that keep the colonos under domination and away from any sense of belonging to a territory or country. I also pray to heal my own anger at growing up poor, at not being able to buy candy or to have the same things as my friends at school. I pray to heal the anger of having to wear used clothes that were not my size, of not being able to buy lunch but to have to bring bread and butter or bread and sugar or, on the best days, bread and egg. I also pray as a form of deep gratitude to my parents because they gave me so much. I pray now with gratitude for my childhood and my secondhand clothes and used shoes, my delicious bread and butter and bread and sugar. I pray for shoe-shining boys who like me could never own the shoes we shined. My heart will always belong to all the shoe-shining kids in the world. They will always belong to me. They are my country and my citizenship. I also pray for a possible future where my children can actually live on the earth. My prayers now are bridges to a future that does not exist but is one that we must create. My daily prayer is the imagination and the desire of another world possible. Prayer is another brick placed toward the building of that bridge. Prayer is a spiritual exercise of the heart that can reshape and heal the past, can orient the heart toward a present of justice and peace, and can move us into a future of real possibilities for life to endure. João Guimarães Rosa, one of the most important Brazilian writers, a novelist, short story writer, and diplomat, wrote in his novel Grande Sertão: Veredas something that I believe could be understood as a prayer: Oh, to experience pleasure, to find joy, We must know everything, Form our souls in consciousness. 4 To pray is to learn how to be happy and have pleasure, but that means shifting from a concept of individual happiness to an understanding of collective joy. For we either move through life together and in solidarity and joy or we die alone in sadness, with individual possessions and a happiness never accomplished. To pray is to know everything, or rather, always to move toward that place. It is to orient ourselves toward this knowing in ways measured by the heart. It is relearning, reshaping our thoughts, thinking about our actions, acting, checking our thinking, and checking our emotions as we get to know ourselves and the lives of others. We do not live by ourselves; we do not own an identity; we do not work for our own “wholeness.” We are more! We are many! We are a compost of soil, water, stars, trees, and air. With the earth, we are a gathering of voices, a plethora of subjectivities, a whole array of emotions, and endless gestures of care and mutuality. To know everything with the heart is to live in deep gratitude and reciprocity to one another, to the earth, to all who have been, who are, and who will be. Prayer is gaining a consciousness of who we are in solidarity with the world we live in and the earth that hosts us. Thus prayer is fundamentally more. Prayer is a way of giving soul to this consciousness, that is, of blending consciousness with compassion, action with thinking, emotions with reason, enthusiasm with empathy. To give soul to consciousness is like giving flesh to the bones, to make the consciousness of prayer be not only a reasonable consciousness but also a soulful, playful one. For our prayers encompass soul and body, consciousness and emotions. They teach and train our whole being skillfully to serve, to honor, to laugh, and to prophesy words of life to the world. To give soul to consciousness is to start our knowing with the primal and most fundamental sense that we must not harm: I must not harm others, I must not harm animals, I must not harm plants, I must not harm myself, I must not harm the earth, I must not harm the rivers, I must not harm the forests, I must not harm the fish in the sea. No, I cannot harm. Soul into consciousness. 5 When we pray something deep must happen in us. We must go to such depth in ourselves that we lose the fear of becoming something else when we are somebody else. The well-being we seek for ourselves is the same well-being as other human beings’, whatever race, country, or location they are from. The well-being we seek for ourselves is the well-being of fish, racoons, hummingbirds, cardinals, worms, plants, mountains, rivers, and oceans. In order for that to happen we enter into a form of alterity, of mutual metamorphosis, which some Brazilian scholars call obliquação. 6 Prayer is an obliquação where we posit ourselves in the place of others. But it is more: it is that moment when I become the other. And still more: it is when I become the other of the other. It is Clarice Lispector, a Brazilian writer whose work influenced the neologism obliquação, coined by Alexandre Nodari, who actually writes in this way. While Lispector never used this concept, her work gives fullness to the ways in which this entanglement and perspectivism happen, this form of deep mutual implication occurs. In one of her stories she says: “I had wanted to be the others before I knew who I was. I realized then that I had already been the others and that was easy. My greatest experience would be to be the other of the others: and the other of the others was me.” 7 To pray is to move in this vertigo in which we realize each of us is a multiplicity of others. To pray is to acquire the perspective of others and have that perspective become mine too. To pray is risky because you start supporting and being with what people say is not you. To pray is this obliquação, this orientation of our hearts toward elsewhere, a God who lives elsewhere, in the lives of others, and yet to discover that elsewhere also lives within us. To pray is to pay attention to the world. The world presents itself and I pray and write. I pray by bricolage, as a creative event that needs nothing less than a transformation of the heart into a new mystery. As Lispector says, “Creation is not an understanding, it is a new mystery.” 8 This transformation will teach me to wonder expansively but also to place limits on myself, ways of living and relating that honor and defend the lives of others, be they other humans, animals, plants, water, air, or soil. Each is a mystery in its own multiplicity. That is true obliquação in prayer. As I write, our world is in the grips of the COVID- 19 pandemic. Indigenous people, Black and brown people, and all of the poor, whatever their race, are dying in high numbers. The world is burning with cries for racial justice after the death of George Floyd. Social inequality is growing exponentially, and the earth is being ripped apart to the point of exhaustion and is perilously close to permanent unbalance. To pray is to attend to these events and people. To pray is to hold onto the mountains so they will not fall apart, it is to hold the skies like the Indigenous people in Brazil, so that the earth can continue to exist a little longer. To pray is to be like Sisyphus and push a boulder up the mountain even if it rolls down again. Until the day it does not. I remember being in Italy in the spring of 2018, visiting the shores of the Mediterranean where the precious little boy Alan Kurdi was found dead after the sinking of a boat of refugees escaping to Europe. His photo, flashed around the world, is engraved in my heart and mind. 9 His body was the presence not only of a Syrian refugee but of the body of our own children. He is a figure of the crisis of refugees and immigrants all over the world. The Afghan-American author Khaled Hosseini wrote the most beautiful book on this experience, Sea Prayer, which I read before heading to Italy. 10 When I visited that place I wept uncontrollably. That night, I created a song without words in which I tried to connect my mother’s prayer, my prayer as a father, my prayer for all the refugees, and a blessing for the precious Alan Kurdi. 11 I must confess that this time of ours is turning me more and more toward prayer. I feel as does the Brazilian composer Gilberto Gil, who has said that these devastating times in Brazil, under the leadership of the fascist and rootless president Bolsonaro, inspire him to pray. 12 I pray to understand the world we live in and to lean closer to those who are suffering. But I only discover what prayer is after I have prayed. Only after. That is why there is a tension always present, combining what I have experienced and what I have become through the lives of others. I pray until I find a way out of no way, until something changes, until something happens and before me are new forms of life, forms of relationships that change and are transformed. To pray is to have our theologies challenged, our cosmologies transformed and expanded. 13 To pray is to ordain our devotions, to help us know how and what to desire. As a desire, prayer is like a seed that once planted in our hearts, sprouts, and from which a flower blooms vividly. And from that flower, there is fruit, which returns back to the earth to start all over again. In the times of destruction of everything we know, amid the ruining of the earth and the disappearing of the world, what does prayer have to do with it all? How can we pray in ways that can postpone the end of the world? Perhaps this is the main question of this book. This Book Prayer is theory and practice together. First-level theology (practice) and second-level theology (theory) together. Prayer is a way of learning to live and to give meaning to life. This book is a kind of theoretical development of my prayer with people who live in the margins, everywhere I have lived. Most fundamentally, this work is deeply shaped by my visits with people from four countries where I traveled during the years 2018 and 2019: the Philippines, South Africa, Jamaica, and Italy. 14 In those places we prayed with people going through hardships and challenges that could not all be thought or spoken. Praying with them was to gain an awareness that we had to stay, linger a little longer with those who were suffering. Being with them reoriented my heart again about how and with whom I should pray. This book encompasses a large trajectory where each chapter adds an important step to the whole of the journey. While there will be many steps yet to be added to the journey as we go and discover, each chapter adds a fold into the movement of living prayers made of feeling/thinking/doing. Let me note two chapters that come from my book What’s Worship Got to Do with It? Interpreting Life Liturgically (Cascade, 2018 ). The first chapter, “Praying With the World at Heart,” illuminates the whole journey, establishing the methodology of prayer: we pray with our hearts laid bare in the world, listening to the breathing of the earth and those destitute of any form of dignity. The chapter “Praying with Black People for Darker Faith” comes after chapter 5, “What Is Common about Our Common Worship? A Methodological Critique of White Reasoning in the Process of Renewal of the Book of Common Worship.” Both chapters together offer a solid case for addressing liturgical racism: the first criticizes a white methodology in creating liturgical resources, and the second, while bringing an awareness of the history of Black folks, offers white churches a new language for prayer in worship that hopes to challenge the rampant structural racism that lives within the Christian faith. All this has grown on me and grown in me: the positionality of prayer, its dispositions, commitments, and awareness. To pray is to cast away demons, spirits of death that inhabit people and political, social, and religious structures. Praying is not simple. But I have learned that there is no way to pray if not with a lump in my throat, babbling words, hoping to find ways to name the trauma and the interruptions of life. I have learned that there is no way to pray if I do not carry the whole world in my heart. The only way to pray is to be fully immersed in body, heart, and soul with those I am praying with and for. I have learned that in order to pray one needs to position oneself with those living at the end of the world, where life is taken away, the air to breathe is robbed, and dignity is stolen. I have learned that unless we change the very methodology of forming and performing liturgy and prayers, we will continue to be the cause of oppression and not its solution. I have learned that I need a new vocabulary, a new reasoning, and a conversion in order to move away from structures of power and pray with those who are at the end of the world. 15 In today’s massive pandemic, I have learned once again that unless we pray from the belly of the beast, prayer is nothing more than a set perfunctory gesture. I have learned that unless I pray with those who are not from my faith, I cannot pray my own Christian prayers. I have learned that unless we pray amidst violence, we are not learning how to reorient our hearts. After living with my own changes, I have learned that I have to pray with the night and with that which causes me to fear. And lately, I have gone through a fundamental conversion in my whole way of thinking, feeling, and believing, moving toward the earth. Without the earth I cannot pray, I cannot breathe, I cannot survive. Living in this world where violence and death threaten us all, I have learned that we are always on the brink of going mad, of losing our hearts—and of losing heart. I pray that this book will speak to you in one way or another. 4. Guimarães Rosa, Grande Sertão, 234. 5. By “consciousness” I mean what has sometimes been translated into English as “conscientization,” as used by Fanon as conscienciser in Black Skins, White Masks; “ conscientização”— “consciousness-raising” and “critical consciousness”—in Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed; “archaeology of knowledge” in Foucault’s The Archaeology of Knowledge; Said’s “self-inventory” in Orientalism; Kopenawa’s dreaming in The Falling Sky; and the peasants’ imagery and struggles in Cusicanqui’s Sociología De La Imagen and Ch’ixinakax utxiwa. 6. Nodari, “‘A vida oblíqua’: o hetairismo ontológico,” 139 – 54. 7. Lispector, “A Experiência Maior,” 23. 8. Lispector, “Brasilia,” 961 – 62. 9. See Walsh, “Alan Kurdi’s Story.” 10. Hosseini, Sea Prayer. 11. Carvalhaes, “A prayer song for Alan Kurdi.” 12. Gil, “Bolsonaro me inspira a oração.” 13. Boff, “Post-COVID- 19 ” (I and II). 14. During the years 2018 and 2019, I developed a project with the Council for World Mission (CWM) (https://www.cwmission.org) named “Re-imagining Worship as Acts of Defiance and Alternatives in the Context of Empire,” in which a group of us from several countries visited four continents: Asia and the Pacific Islands (Manila, Philippines), Africa (Johannesburg, South Africa), the Americas (Kingston, Jamaica), and Europe (Scicli, Italy). During these four gatherings, scholars, pastors, students, artists, and church members lived with the people in poor communities and afterwards wrote collectively their impressions and experiences of these places in the form of liturgical resources. A book with a collection of these prayers, songs, rituals, rites of healing, eucharistic and baptismal prayers, meditations, and art was published recently: Carvalhaes, Liturgies from Below. For more on this project, see chapter 3, “Praying With People at the Ends of the Earth.” 15. In most of the book, as in the titles of chapters 3 and 4, I speak of the ends of the world; elsewhere, as in the title of the final chapter, I speak of the end of the world. See that chapter for an explanation of the distinction I draw there. When I use the expression “at the ends of the world” (including in the phrases “people living at the ends of the world” or “people at the ends of the world”) in this book, I mean a combination of ( 1 ) “the ends of the earth,” geographically far away from what we in the “included” consider as far and ( 2 ) people who are on the margins in all societies everywhere, those who are most poor and disenfranchised economically, politically, socially, culturally, physically, racially, sexually, ecclesially, and in other ways, who are forgotten and live in places that are abandoned, neglected, torn by violence. When I use “the end [singular] of the world, I add to these two meanings those of ( 3 ) in the accepted sense of the time of the end of the world, since for the most excluded people, it has always already been the end of the world; and ( 4 ) “at the end of the world” as the ending time of the world which now hangs over us and threatens us due to the human destruction of the earth. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.