6 Praying with Black People for Darker Faith Almost always, the creative, dedicated minority has made the world better. —Martin Luther King Jr. 105 Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous. —George Orwell 106 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly. —Jesus in John 10: 10 F or more than five hundred years, Indigenous people have had their lands stolen, their culture appropriated, their people marginalized, exploited, jailed, killed. For almost four hundred years, Black people have had their origins uprooted, their culture appropriated, their people kidnapped, pushed to the margins of society, exploited, jailed, killed. For more than 180 years, the original Mexican people have had their lands stolen, and with other Latinx people in this country, they have had their culture appropriated and their people abused, pushed to the margins of society, exploited, jailed, killed. For all of this country’s history, the stranger and the non-white have been demoted, defaced, abused, ripped apart, thrown away, yet used as a resource for the building of the nation. This chapter continues the work of the previous chapter, with examples of prayers to begin developing a language that can dismantle the silence of racism in Christian churches. With this chapter I have tried to follow what theologian Willie James Jennings writes in The Christian Imagination: Theology and the Origins of Race: “I yearn for a vision of Christian intellectual identity that is compelling and attractive, embodying not simply the cunning of reason but the power of love that gestures toward joining, toward the desire to hear, to know, and to embrace.” 107 I have also tried to follow womanist ethicist Emilie Townes’s call for justice and peace and the words of Howard Thurman, whose work she values as I do. Townes writes, “Our world needs a new (or perhaps ancient) vision molded by justice and peace rather than winning and losing if we are to unhinge the cultural production of evil. Doing so is to respond to the call by the Black mystic and theologian Howard Thurman who joined others in encouraging us to blend head and heart.” 108 Since the invasion of the Americas, there has been a project of whitening the continent. This project has been made possible by the de-negrating (denigrating), blackening, turning “negro,” of everybody who was not white. 109 The blackening of people was a way for the dominant, conquering cultures to organize non-whites into a lower caste of humankind by marking bodily features, composing sources of religion, forming culture, and defining how someone can be called human. Notions of white normalcy, control, and order, shaped through the images and concepts of light and darkness, were at the heart of this process. 110 The creation of race was necessary for the creation of whiteness as an uncontested form of superiority and power control. Thus, the reality of life and also the appearance of that reality forged racist ideas that grounded the very foundation of this nation. The founders built a society with legislative and democratic views that would not be able to distinguish whiteness from moral virtues and Blackness from deviation, malfunction, and dubious origins. In other words, this historical racial process—really a process of racializing —has been organized by white reasoning, that is, the whitening of sources, forms of thinking, living, praying, worshiping, believing, and understanding of how to be human. This whitening of the Americas has been accompanied by the stealing of the riches of this land. Europe and the US Empire still live off of the riches stolen from Africa, the Americas, and blackened people—and by blackened people I mean the denigrating process of make non-whites become colored. 111 Since the beginning of colonization, and for all these centuries, power has been in the hands of white individuals and families while blackened people have had to face all forces of death and struggle to survive. It has been the inner work of resistance and resilience, strategies and wisdom, strength, and faith of all the blackened people of this land that have brought them and all of their wisdom and sources this far, alive. During all these years, Christianity has been a part of this creation of racial ideas. It has been part and parcel of the whitening of the American continent. The contours and content of the Christian faith have been built on white sources. Theology has mainly been a white project. Worship has been a white project built over the bodies of people of color to teach people to pray in white ways, whether ways of articulating the content of prayers or the ways of performing them. Historically, white churches have learned to discern faith and life in white terms—in other words, to sense with a bodily perception that is white, the whole world and God through white religious glasses. During all these years, only a few people and groups have fought against the degrading and devaluing and disrespecting of Indigenous, Black, Latinx, and Asian people and all who fit the category of the stranger. All the strangers were thrown into the same exclusionary bus. Very few people prayed for people of color, with people of color, about people of color and their histories. For more than five hundred years, this mighty project in the Americas also convinced we colored people that white people have always been the best thing that happened to this land. And to us! Civilization, progress, culture, manners, organization, order, sexual standards, were all proper forms of humanity wrapped in religious language. Civil religion was mixed with religious beliefs, conflating obedience to slave masters with obedience to God. Good and evil were established by the colors of religious ownership. The demonizing of forms of Black(ened) bodies was fundamental to the conquest of the Americas. In a play of values around what was to be considered human, what was worthy of honoring, and what was to be condemned, there was a need for the demonic 112 actions of white slave owners that created racial-social-theological constructions to turn Black people (blackened bodies) into natural creations, social expressions, and cultural manifestations of the demonic. From there, the whole reasoning of the racial demonizing was set. Disobedience and lack of submission by blackened bodies was a sign of being occupied by the devil, and obedience, submission, proper (white) manners, lack of resistance, and acceptance of God’s will were signs of being closest to the God and most obedient to the Bible. The formation of a white civilization came through the denial of the full humanity of blackened people, those who were not-white. Colonization used liturgical sources such as prayer, hymns, orders of worship, liturgical moral and gestural codes wrapped up in white religious reasoning. However, even if Africans and other blackened people embraced Christianity, the Christian faith did not serve to give them their worth or full humanity. African American theologian and historian Gayraud S. Wilmore writes: The British rationalized the enslavement of both Africans and Indians because they were different in appearance to themselves and because they were heathens. When it became evident that Blacks were becoming believers despite widespread neglect by official church bodies, Virginia was the first of the colonies to make short shrift of the matter by declaring in 1667 that “the conferring of baptism doth not alter the condition of the person as to his bondage of freedom.” 113 The forms of colonization—its inward and outward brutality, its ugly and kinder forms of appearance, its angry faces and smiles, its passive-aggressive moral conducts—brought forth racist ideas that have shaped our societies, designated our common riches for only a few white people, and told us how and where we should live, how we should think—have molded our own feelings and established what is normal in our society. Five hundred years of heavy and violent colonial education and white European theology have deeply marked our universal and white religious understandings of God, our detachment from the earth, our perceptions of the sacred, our hymnody, our liturgical gestures, our orders of worship. Everything was covered by a divinely given understanding that kept the white faith dominating every heart, without even a need for explanation. The structural forms of dominance are marked in our historical documents. For example, the Declaration of Independence, the US sense of its own exceptionalism, 114 and the doctrine of Manifest Destiny created a necessary mass of critical symbolic and concrete materiality that established a forceful white ideology of conquering and expansion so as to secure its racist underpinnings. Grounded in an undeniable—but also idolatrous—faith, turning God into what was not God (that is, sanctifying civic actions into God’s promises), this country was understood to be chosen to be great from its very beginning and apart from all others. The theological and civic privilege—the duty—to expand and conquer was given by God and protected by God. The moral superiority of those holding the power, be it political, economic, or religious has fed the formation of an Empire of demonic forces of destruction of people of color. At the heart of these events, there were rich white people thinking, believing, acting, leading, and using power—even against their own poor white folks, the “white trash.” This white dominion was guarded by demonic power that had Indigenous, Blacks, and Latinxs either killed or enslaved so that the conquest could be established. This conquering power created laws that fall under the sacred umbrella of “democracy.” It allowed conquest to move on to the wastelands—land that was not under the control of white folks in some form of appropriation or progress—and to use blackened bodies in whatever way it was necessary to build the empire. In this way, the demonic, that which breaks and rips apart and steals, conducted the owning and privatizing of common natural resources and the free labor of Black people that were at the root of the savage system of capitalism that now rules this country. 115 That demonic power is still at work today. The use of power to structure life and the very forms of thinking and being continues today with the ongoing killing and disenfranchising of Blacks, Indigenous people, Latinxs, immigrants, with the control of the economic market by the white private sector, and the necessary US engagement with endless wars across the globe in order to maintain the structure of the US economy and to protect, expand, and fulfill the call to continue being the American Empire. Same Power Structure, New Forms of Disfigurement The words of Jesus in the Gospel of John witness to us: “The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy” ( 10: 10 NRSV). The thieves that came more than five hundred years ago continue to lie, steal, destroy, and kill. Our politicians lie, our economic structure destroys the poor, and the white reasoning of this country continues to kill our people daily. Symptoms of this ongoing demonic structure have surfaced with the killings of Black people by the police across the US. The recent awareness of the deaths of Black people (Trayvon Martin, John Crawford III, Amadou Diallo, Manuel Loggins Jr., Ronald Madison, Kendra James, Sean Bell, Eric Garner, Michael Brown, Alton Sterling, Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, and so many others) has exposed patterns of policing that have existed since the era of slavery. 116 In the United States, young Black men were nine times more likely than other Americans to be killed by police officers in 2015. 117 These killings are fully associated with a demonic structure of living that was planned, organized, and enforced through a system that persists in whitening the country by disfiguring all that is not white. “The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy.” The only reason we know about these recent killings is because of the power of phone cameras and social media used by common people on the streets who made videos go viral. The historical lack of information about police reports has now surfaced and police departments, often led by white people, had to start publicizing their reports. 118 Moreover, the erasure, denial, or approval of violence against Black people in the media (often owned by white people), the decisions by states to invest in prisons rather than schools, the ongoing cuts in social support for blackened communities often supported by white political representatives, the policies that replaced Jim Crow, continue to be the structures of death, even if that death is called democracy, an illusory system whose main task is to maintain the appearance of equality and justice. 119 Democratic systems, education, churches, economic systems, prison, police, and housing are all institutions of the same form of racism, supporting a white system of control of power and riches. Public policies are thieves, killing systems majorly sanctioned by demonic laws that continue this control locally and nationally. The thieves are in the highest places stealing from the poor and giving to the rich. For example, from 1934 to 1962 the US government backed 120 billion dollars worth of home loans that were given only to white people as a result of what came to be called “redlining,” the systematic drawing of red lines around certain neighborhoods, not coincidentally inhabited by people of color, especially African Americans. Redlining created a ripple effect of white people with rising assets and Black people continuing to live in poverty, in the “ghetto,” without investment by the state or the banks, and consequently a lack of good schools, job opportunities, and social expansion. The thieves are everywhere. Along with public policies, the stereotyping of Black people as lazy, not wanting to work, and abusing federal resources lies deeply seated in white people’s consciousness, spread as truth, and affecting the feelings and worldviews of both white and Black people, in very different ways. The psychological effect of five hundred years of colonization and the daily manifestations of racist ideas, gestures, relations, and power dynamics have had immense reverberations in the ways Black people live their lives. The thieves are deeply invested in the institutions of this country. Politically, neither political party has ever fully served the racial-ethnic minorities—soon to be the majority—of this country. The best they have done is to mend parts of the system in order to keep the structure of exclusion running. The disease of racism plagues this country and has kept Black people as second-class citizens for our entire history, away from the wealth of the country and its social sources of sustenance. The Same Power Structure in the White Christian Churches The thieves have stolen Christianity. They have stolen the revolutionary kernel of the Christian faith, have destroyed its promises of equality and justice, and have killed the central idea of God’s option for the poor. In a game of appearances and platitudes, the thieves and all their related demons have made a failed Christianity look as if it were alive through the performance of perfunctory religious rituals. The system of white reasoning has caused white Christian churches to hide under a gospel of “unconditional love,” an unmarked sense of love that in reality hides the markers of racism and the exclusion of people of color. The structures of white Christian churches and their theological and liturgical resources are often produced or constructed by white people for white people of a certain class. 120 This has immediate consequences for our prayers and how we pray. If prayer is the grammar of our faith and the white church has never created a deep religious language to engage with Black people, Indigenous people, Latinx, Asian-Pacific, or immigrant communities of any race or culture, then the content of the Christian faith has never had a grammar where prayers could be spoken as a means to enter into solidarity with non-white communities. The results are that faith continues to have a fully white vocabulary that offers scripts and scriptures of life in a specific format. When white churches deal with non-white people and their concerns, the response is often muted, for there is no vocabulary to help address them. I have seen white people who are willing to engage in solidarity with Black people, but they lack a vocabulary to do so, which prevents them from acting and from making mistakes, from saying something wrong. The larger result in the public arena is that white churches end up supporting white Christians or white people in most political circumstances. In the 2016 presidential election, eight in ten white evangelical Protestants voted for Donald Trump, and the majority of white Roman Catholics and mainline Protestants also supported a candidate who has publicly shown his racist views. These numbers show not only the inadequacy to engage non-white people but a visceral rejection of “blackened” people, a rejection mixed with fear, anger, and resentment. In this vein, Donald Trump becomes the white man who “gets it,” the one who will correct the wrongs of a government that has put blackened people ahead of white people with social assistance, against white people who are suffering and did not receive help from their government. The favorite candidate, his supporters believe, will get rid of the blackened people and bring the country back to a mythical and imaginary time when this country was great. This is only possible because white churches have almost always had pastors and theologians who have never engaged blackened people, their ways of living, their sufferings, and their resources. The grammar of prayer has not moved us toward blackened people. I wonder how many prayer books contain prayers referring to Black people, prayers composed by Black people, that raise their concerns, their history, and their pain and openly speak against the violence of racism and white supremacy. It is a demand and not an option for Christians to pray with Black people for the dismantling of the racist structures of liturgies. Prayers can shift our worldviews, our desires, call for change and offer seeds of change. Perhaps it is wishful thinking, but I do believe prayers can offer seeds of change. Prayers can shift our feelings, move our ideas, transform our behaviors, invent new ecclesiologies and concrete forms of mission, create new practices, and bring about forms of concrete love for people we never knew we could love or even had to love in a real way. Prayers inspire us and empower us to engage in ways of living that can help to restore humanity to blackened people. Providing a new grammar and vocabulary for our faith, prayer can shift the form of our thinking; it can open for a new kind of anthropology, one that is beyond our present concept of white superiority over people of color. Beyond that, as we see elsewhere in this book, prayer can also shift our view that humans are above animals and that we have the earth to exploit for our own desires. Praying with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Liturgically, the church cannot be silent either! It has to confess its ideological liturgical silences and universalized colonial supremacies, its uncomfortable feelings, its theological “forgetting,” and its liturgical vocabulary of faith. In a word: its vicious sins. We must start a new vocabulary of prayer. I propose these prayers to start breaking the white vocabulary of Christian liturgies. What follows is an exercise of prayer along with some writings of Martin Luther King Jr. To do so, in this section I am using several sources. I quote from two of King’s works: “A Tough Mind and a Tender Heart,” the first sermon in King’s book Strength to Love, 121 and the well-known “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” written in 1963. (The first three quotations are from “A Tough Mind and a Tender Heart,” and the remaining quotations that follow are from his “Letter.”) 122 I also have in mind the work of artist Daniel Rarela, who “designed a series of memes to stop the late civil right leader from getting whitewashed.” 123 From “A Tough Mind and a Tender Heart” Let us consider the need for a tough mind, characterized by incisive thinking, realistic appraisal, and decisive judgment. The tough mind is sharp and penetrating, breaking through the crust of legends and myths and sifting the true from the false.... This prevalent tendency toward softmindedness is found in man’s unbelievable gullibility.... This undue gullibility is also seen in the tendency of many readers to accept the printed word of the press as final truth. Few people realize that even our authentic channels of information—the press, the platform, and in many instances the pulpit—do not give us objective and unbiased truth. Few people have the toughness of mind to judge critically and to discern the true from the false, the fact from the fiction. Our minds are constantly being invaded by legions of half-truths, prejudices, and false facts. One of the great needs of mankind is to be lifted above the morass of false propaganda.... Softminded persons have revised the Beatitudes to read, “Blessed are the pure in ignorance: for they shall see God.”... There is little hope for us until we become toughminded enough to break loose from the shackles of prejudice, half-truths, and downright ignorance. Prayer God of our thinking, give us a tough mind to be with Black folks all the way. Help us think with them and not against them. Help us understand their historical pain. Help us know the difference between them and the people who call them thugs. For our weary times are filled with half-truths. We know people are paid to misrepresent the truth so that we cannot find a way to oppose and resist. We continue to be confused, so we pray for wisdom! Wisdom to know the sources of news. Wisdom to choose the better forms of knowledge. For we know where there is wisdom, there is happiness. There is justice. Help us see the difference between truths and half-truths, structural violence and localized violence, and deliver us from ignorance and fear. God of wisdom, more than anything we need wisdom and the desire to learn to read to engage to listen to those who suffer. So we can have our minds changed, our hearts moved. So we can be transformed. In Christ the truth, we pray. Amen! From “A Tough Mind and a Tender Heart” But we must not stop with the cultivation of a tough mind. The gospel also demands a tender heart. Toughmindedness without tenderheartedness is cold and detached, leaving one’s life in a perpetual winter devoid of the warmth of spring and the gentle heat of summer. What is more tragic than to see a person who has risen to the disciplined heights of toughmindedness but has at the same time sunk to the passionless depths of hardheartedness? Prayer God who sees us all, we pray for these two gifts: a tough mind and a tender heart. May we gain a tough mind to face those who live near us who are filled with hatred and see Black lives matter as a threat. May we gain a tender heart so we can trust that goodness and love will trump racism. Teach us to be disciplined and relentless in the struggle for racial justice. May we discern that only when our Black friends are safe and have a full life. Our minds and hearts can finally rest in you. Again we pray: give us tough minds and tender hearts so we can live with Black folks in justice and equality like a bird that needs two wings to fly. In your mercy! From “A Tough Mind and a Tender Heart” I am thankful that we worship a God who is both toughminded and tenderhearted. If God were only toughminded, he would be a cold, passionless despot sitting in some far-off heaven “contemplating all,” as Tennyson puts it in “The Palace of Art.” He would be Aristotle’s “unmoved mover,” self-knowing, but not other-loving. But if God were only tenderhearted, he would be too soft and sentimental to function when things go wrong and incapable of controlling what he has made. Prayer We all praise you God because from your tough mind and tender heart you have looked upon us equally. But we have made your love look more favorably on some white people. We who have everything have not looked at those who don’t have. We even think that the have-nots are where they are because it is their fault! We have learned to contemplate you and you alone without contemplating those who have been wronged by history. We pray that in our worship together you may help us to see how some have benefited from a certain sense of your love while others have not. Help us see how we have naturalized your love just for those who are from the same class, race, sex and health. Discipline us to see racial structures of love and hate everywhere. To see that our society is only made for some to live while others are sentenced to prison and death. Judge us and give us another chance. We praise you for helping us deal with our fears and helping us approach blackened brothers and sisters. May your tough mind and soft heart help us in our racism. Help us find courage to hear what we need to hear and engage with one another and repent help us to be transformed, become better people to one another. We praise and worship you o God of all Blackness! In your blackened name we pray! From the “Letter” You deplore the demonstrations taking place.... But your statement fails to express a similar concern for the condition that brought about the demonstrations. I am sure that none of you would want to rest content with the superficial kind of social analysis that deals merely with the effects and does not grapple with the underlying causes. Prayer: We confess that we are afraid of street demonstrations and protestors. We confess that we are fearful. We confess that we are angry that they don’t follow proper order and laws that we follow in order to make changes. We confess it has to either be our way or no way because we think we are the ones who understand the more democratic ways to behave. To behave properly. We confess that we feel we built this country and they came later. We confess they are destroying things that we consider sacred: the US flag, private properties, public symbols. We confess that we do not know how to handle it and feel safer when they are put to jail. We confess we cannot see the perspective of the marginalized and are content to believe major news reporting. We confess that we tried to settle the case of Black people as quickly as possible, turning our racism into personal issues, blaming the Black folks for violence without looking at the violence of our racialized systems of oppression. We confess that we blamed Black people for their violence against each other without understanding that it is the lack of basic conditions of life that creates violence and dysfunction. We confess we don’t know the basics of the history of racism in this country and how this country was built on the backs of Indigenous, Black, brown and other marginalized people. That is why we cannot understand “their” situation. We have no clue how it is to be a Black person in this country. In your mercy! From the “Letter” You may well ask, “Why direct action? Why sit-ins, marches and so forth? Isn’t negotiation a better path?” You are quite right in calling for negotiation. Indeed, this is the very purpose of direct action. Nonviolent direct action seeks to foster such a tension that a community which has constantly refused to negotiate is forced to confront the issue. Prayer God of our abysses We do indeed ask why we need direct action, sit-ins, marches, and civil disobedience. We cannot understand why they can’t talk, calmly, in the order that makes us comfortable. Why can’t they kindly ask for change? And wait for due process? We think we have always wanted to negotiate but now they invade public and private places and make demands. Why oh my soul do I think that way? What is it in me that I cannot grasp the fact that their rights are bigger than my fears? That their time is not my time? That my fulfilled needs allow me to wait through longer transformation? That my entitlement cannot keep me from processing the immediacy of their complaints? Give us darkness! So we can see their light! Give us light to understand the extent of our racism and the extent of white supremacy. Help me God to rid my soul of the thinking that only my life, family, and property are important. With your help, I will understand that we have refused to wrestle with the difficult issues related to Black people. With your help, we will be able to see that Blacks or Indigenous or Latinxs or immigrants are no less than your children. In your mercy! From the “Letter” We have not made a single gain in civil rights without determined... nonviolent pressure. Lamentably, it is an historical fact that privileged groups seldom give up their privileges voluntarily.... We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed. Prayer God who can change us, help us go through conversion. May your Spirit create in us a true change, conversion, metanoia. For we cannot see we have so many privileges and instead we have called it blessings that you bestowed upon us! We know that the place we have now was given to us by our fathers and fathers’ fathers who worked hard for it! And we now work hard to keep it. Why now do we have to give anything? God of change we cannot really see this. We cannot change but we pray help us change and see that power is not voluntarily shared. Help us see that! In your mercy! From the “Letter” Justice too long delayed is justice denied. Prayer O God, why do we see this sense of justice only when it has to do with us and our needs? Why do I believe in long democratic processes for justice when it is for others and am so impatient when I need justice for myself? Why don’t I go out to the streets and demand justice for Black people right now? Help us, O God, to join the fight! May we learn the justices and injustices of our country! May we go to the streets with Black Lives Matter! May we listen to members of this movement see what is needed to support them in love, care, and sustenance. Help us go to the streets where communities of color, now my people, are fighting for justice! Help us O God! From the “Letter” When you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick and even kill your Black brothers and sisters;... when you have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old son who is asking: “Daddy, why do white people treat people of color so mean?”... Then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait. Prayer Merciful God, when a child asks, we often listen. But when our children ask about race or Black people, we silence and deny racism exists in our household in us and in our country. Yes we have mistreated Black people, yes we have enslaved them, yes we have created laws to impede them from living full lives. Help us, O God, to be honest with our children even when they don’t ask. Help us to speak up and be honest with you with our children and with the blackened people. So we can be attuned to your own voice and your own love! In your mercy! From the “Letter” One has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws. I would agree with St. Augustine that “an unjust law is no at all.”... Any law that uplifts human personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is unjust. Prayer God of truthful laws, we are learning with our brothers and sisters that the law is not sacred, that laws are a human creation and not sanctified by you. Give us strength to fight the laws that privilege some people and dismiss others. Give us strength to fight the state when it creates laws that support the lives of a few people and put many others in jail. Help us go after the local policies of our communities and see how racism is so fully present here. Help us dismantle the unjust system of laws, so we can create legislative equality for all. In your mercy! From the “Letter” I have been gravely disappointed with the white moderate.... The Negro’s great stumbling block in his stride toward freedom is not... the Ku Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more devoted to “order” than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence of tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly says: “I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot agree with your methods of direct action”; who paternalistically believes he can set the timetable for another man’s freedom.... Shallow understanding from people of good will is more frustrating than absolute misunderstanding from people of ill will. Prayer We confess that all we’ve attempted to be is moderate to uphold order to find a common ground to foster positive peace so we wouldn’t need to change anything, much less ourselves. Help us to move away from that place, where order and decency is a facade for the protection of white people. Give us courage for we are weak and slow in making up our minds. May we finally see that we are not free unless our brothers and sisters are free. Our churches have not necessarily associated themselves with the KKK, but we have been silent, we have not spoken up. So we pray you give us voices and words to speak, to you, to each other, to our congregations, and to those in power. Help us sit with and listen to those who are suffering. Help us change O God, help us change! In your mercy! From the “Letter” One who breaks an unjust law must do so openly, lovingly, and with a willingness to accept the penalty. I submit that an individual who breaks a law that conscience tells him is unjust, and who willingly accepts the penalty of imprisonment in order to arouse the conscience of the community over its injustice, is in reality expressing the highest respect for the law. Prayer God of love, in your name we will go to the streets. We will disobey the human laws that trap the poor so we can obey you! From you, we have learned that when we are fighting for those suffering, we discover where Jesus actually is. Help us always commit to stand alongside the poor. Help us see that your love is given to all, but preferentially to the poor and those who are at the margins of history, at the margin of our communities. In your mercy! From the “Letter” We who engage in nonviolent direct action are not the creators of tension. We merely bring to the surface the hidden tension that is already alive.... Injustice must be exposed, with all the tension its exposure creates, to the light of human conscience and the air of national opinion before it can be cured. Prayer God of solidarity, we will join our Black brothers and sisters. We will go where they are. We will eat a common meal. We will ask what it is to live the lives they live. We will listen. Our communities have people who are sick Help us visit each other, our communities have families who have beloved ones in jail. Help us visit each other and fight against homelessness, the incarceration of blackened people. Help us find places, organizations, and people so we can fight together! May our community cry out loud: Black Lives Matter! May our local church be chapters of justice, making a grassroots revolution. In your mercy! From the “Letter” I should have realized that few members of the oppressor race can understand the deep groans and passionate yearnings of the oppressed race, and still fewer have the vision to see that injustice must be rooted out by strong, persistent and determined action. Prayer May we be those who can understand the deep groans and passionate yearnings of the oppressed race. May we see, hear, and sense the anxiety, fears and all the challenges of growing up as Black and colored people in this country! May we engage in deep listening! Now and for the days to come! In your mercy! From the “Letter” We will have to repent in this generation not merely for the hateful words and actions of the bad people but for the appalling silence of the good people. Human progress never rolls in on the wheels of inevitability; it comes through the tireless efforts of men willing to be co-workers with God, and without this hard work, time itself becomes an ally of the forces of social stagnation. Prayer We repent, O God, for we have run this race without paying attention to those who run with much more weight on their bodies. Dealing with centuries of trauma, with a deeply colonized history, and destitute of land, of honor, of possibilities. May we have our minds and our hearts transformed. Help us see that we have also created and supported systems of injustices. Help us create innovative structures of peace, redistribution of money, sharing of resources, health care for all, free college tuitions, and an egalitarian education system. Remind us that we are each other’s keepers. May we fight all of the forces of social stagnation, including the ones inside of us! Now and forever! We pray that by your grace and mercy, our world will grow darker by the blessed presence of colored people! May we see the gift of darkness against the illusion of a self-made light that only shines our own! In your mercy! Amen. Conclusion Professor Stephen Ray once reminded me of how the blackening was meant as evil and how, as with all things, God brought good out of it. So many of us found freedom in the Christian faith. Christ has become our liberator! Now we can have a church that is talking over its historical failures and moving toward justice and the true love of God by dismantling the work of the thieves. While Jesus says in the first part of John 10: 10, “The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy,” in the second part Jesus says, “I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly.” Together, whites and all blackened people, by the grace of God in Jesus Christ, will turn lies into truth, restitute what was stolen from oppressed people, bring life where there was death, and rebuild what was destroyed. Together, we will show this abundant life we live in Jesus by building and defending together the beloved community, which has people of all colors. “The beloved community,” originally coined by US pragmatist philosopher Josiah Royce, is a term developed and popularized by Martin Luther King Jr. and Howard Thurman. King wanted to use this metaphor as a springboard, a symbol, and also a concrete arrival of our society, a place where love, peace, and justice could live together. Dr. King’s hopes for this beloved community were grounded in non-violence, but also as a place with generative conflicts, where justice should be a constant struggle with the belief that through our common agape love we could make it happen. We can also build, defend, and expand the beloved community through its liturgical structures, orders, and rituals of transformation. For liturgy is always a call to conversion! The “liturgy’s danger,” says liturgical theologian Nathan D. Mitchell, “is to resist or ignore its call to conversion.” 124 To pray with a blackened faith in a darker context begs us to consider the relationship between lex orandi, lex credendi, lex vivendi, and lex agendi, that is, the intertwining of the rule of prayer, the rule of belief, the rule of life, and the rule of action. This is because when we pray, all vulnerable life is at stake, especially Black lives. When we pray, our very breathing, our hunger, our limitations, our desires, our social systems, everything enters into a movement of circulation of feelings, energies and thinking. When we pray, our own breathing reminds us that we are made of the air, the sun, the soil, the birds, and all God’s creation. When we utter words in prayer we are disclosing not only our hearts to God but also our biased heart is exposed, our racist upbringing becomes clear. When we give our offerings in prayer we are also showing the systems to which we are connected, where we live, what kind of health insurance we have, what culture we are part of, and what and with whom we have our deepest commitments. Thus, prayer is always prayed in some deep context, which includes the race and ecological systems in which we are immersed and help to sustain. Thus, to pray is to weave together the liturgy of the church, the liturgy of the world, and the liturgy of the neighbor against forms of racism and exclusion. To pray is to make an option for the poor. To pray is to turn our hearts into a darker faith, because we are now unequivocally inhabited by all people of color. With faith, hope is also turned Black! Love is turned Black! For to pray is to enter the darker side of all those disfranchised, of all colored people, which surely included “darkened” whites, where the number of disposable people across the globe grow every day. Darker ethics and darker creeds, darker social actions and darker prayers, all shaping desires, giving contours to hurts, establishing ways of living, creating economic mechanisms of control, forming joys, elaborating concerns, relating us to the earth, defining pain, making us sing some songs, and throwing us into living in certain ways with our local communities and our plural world. All of these things together compose every prayer we pray. Our ever-expanding Christian identity calls us into new and constant metanoias, changes our ways of thinking, shifts our views of the world, embodies individual and communal prayers of justice so we can create a praxis of solidarity and transformation with the poor and the earth. And we can only do that if we engage our prayers into breaking the potencies of racism. In order to do that, we must embody Christ as our full prayer. 105. King, “A Knock at Midnight.” 106. Orwell, “Politics and the English Language.” 107. Jennings, Christian Imagination, 8. 108. Townes, Womanist Ethics and Cultural Production of Evil, 164. 109. See my discussion of “denigrating” and “blackening” in chapter 5. 110. See Allen, Invention of the White Race, and Heng, “Invention of Race in the Middle Ages.” 111. See Galeano, Open Veins of Latin America. 112. Throughout this chapter, the use of the word “demonic” has to do with breaking and ripping apart, with destruction and death. The intent here is not to demonize any person but to name the powers and forces of destruction as evil structures of death. 113. Wilmore, “Historical Perspective,” 21. 114. See Douglas, Stand Your Ground. 115. Leiman, Political Economy of Racism. 116. In Brazil, a Black person is killed every twenty-three minutes. See, for example, http://www.bbc.com/portuguese/brasil- 36461295. 117. Swaine et al., “Young Black Men Killed by US Police.” 118. Lowery, They Can’t Kill Us All. 119. Alexander, The New Jim Crow. 120. See my critique of the creation of liturgical sources in the Presbyterian Church (USA) in chapter 5 of this volume and an earlier, shorter version in Carvalhaes, “White Reasoning,” 19 – 27. 121. King, Strength to Love. 122. Because of this litany’s length, worship leaders may wish to use it in sections in different parts of the worship service. I am highlighting passages of my own choosing, but also following the highlights chosen by artists who have illustrated those excerpts to highlight the power of King’s work. 123. My hope is that the reader will read the whole letter several times and view the images on the website: “Artist creates ‘Letter from a Birmingham Jail’ memes to stop people from whitewashing ML.” https://www.mic.com/articles/ 165598 /artist-createsletters-from-birmingham-jail-memes-to-stop-people-from-whitewashing-mlk. 124. Mitchell, Meeting Mystery, 42. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.