7 Praying with the People of Axé An Interreligious Dialogue 125 T he Christian faith cannot be understood without its many ways of praying. Prayer is the very grammar of our faith, the way in which we Christians hear, speak, and understand. As human beings, we cannot escape language, and as Christians we cannot escape prayer. Prayer gives shape to who and what we are. The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote that “the limits of my language mean the limits of my world.” 126 In the same way, the limits of our prayers are the limits of our faith. Faith is a complex and interconnected web of personal and collective struggles, hybridisms, behavior codes, voices, random gestures, historical developments, political battles, and the movements of the Spirit of God. Christians stand between Babel and Pentecost, both in Christianity’s biblical accounts and its contemporary engagements and enactments across the globe, building societies, and organizing differences between Christians and people of other faiths and wisdom paths. From these ancient and contemporary places we create and recreate our prayers and our identities. In this endless becoming, we are called to expand the traditions of prayers in the history of the church just as we are to expand the limits of our faith and our world. Traditioning Our Prayers Our prayers are a result of many people’s traditions wrestling with the Christian faith in their own times and spaces. Tradition comes from the Latin traditio, “to hand on.” (The Greek paradosis has the same meaning.) Having received our faith from our ancestors, we are now in charge of shaping it in accordance with our challenges and needs. Frederick Van Fleteren writes that “texts from the tradition can legitimately be used as an occasion for entirely new thought.” 127 Thus, it is our task, from the location in which we are placed, to engage the sources of our traditions, honor these traditions as they offer possibilities for justice and mercy, and reshape these traditions according to a new perspective, one that entails both new and old thinking and that aims to engage in actions from a place of love. The purpose is not to make tradition what we want, but rather to bear witness to our people about how people of faith have responded to past challenges and to see the ways in which God’s love helps us respond to the situations in which we now live. The pattern of the church’s prayer can help us as we connect Earth, life, ethics, and belief. We also need prayers that will orient us towards other religions. We need to learn their prayers and to offer our own prayers of supplication for those who are not Christians with blessings and healings. Our prayers for these people and communities would be also prayers of thanksgiving to God for their existence, their wisdom, and their ways of living. Our supplication for today should be for a world without violence, for lives to have a fundamental value regardless of any religious categorization or affiliation. At the same time, our prayer should be for the protection and restoration of ecosystems. Our prayers of supplication and thanksgiving must help us to realize that we are all the imago Dei (image of God), and that we are responsible for each other and for our daughters and sons. In our time, our prayers of supplication and thanksgiving must be prayers for the survival of every person, especially those persons who are poor. In this way, our prayers of supplication and thanksgiving offered every Sunday and every day must say, “Black lives matter! We offer supplications for them!” Our prayers must say, “We are killing the earth and we need to restore its sources and rhythms of life! We pray for this.” Our prayers must say, “There are people exploiting and subjugating other people, oppressing and killing people of other faiths, and we need salvation for all!” When we pray these prayers of supplication, we are generating the mutual learning and social sustenance of hope. This work of hope is also a way of engaging our Christian traditions. Orlando Espín, using “tradition” as a verb, writes about traditioning and hope: How can Christians tradition their hope without adulterating its subversive challenge? A hope that subverts all that humans regard as definitive has been one of the crucial forces driving the complex of traditioning processes that create and have sustained the religion we call Christianity. 128 Against what Espín calls “Christianity’s historical inclination to ‘doctrinify’ the subversive hope,” he proposes that “Christian traditioning can (even as it liberates)—witness interculturally to the subversive hope that lies at the heart of Christianity.” 129 Our commitment is thus not to doctrines, but to our brothers and sisters in need, to the care of the earth, and to brothers and sisters of different faiths living in destitution and fear. Our prayers are a commitment to our neighborhoods, our villages and cities, and our communities. Our commitment is to create networks of hope, through prayer, belief, and ethical actions, combining the laws of orandi, credendi, and vivendi. Our contexts beg for us to create ecumenical connections and relationships, moving away from the model of denominational self-sufficiency and distinctive cultural identities to a model of ecclesio-interconnectedness and intersectionality of identities. We must see other religions as distinct from ours, yet we can be involved with them on different levels. We cannot afford to live with only one worship book, one prayer book, and one hymnal. We are called to tradition our worship, prayers, songs, and lives in and through a vast array of identities and sources, so as to be empowered by the Spirit in a multiplicity of God’s revelations. We are called to connect with our brothers and sisters from different faith and religious traditions, and this chapter seeks to engage the possibilities of that connection. Expanding the Circles of Tradition: Interreligious Prayers The Dalai Lama was once invited to Riverside Church in New York City for a conversation, and I was part of the group from Union Theological Seminary that created a ritual on the occasion of his talk. We had art and artists, symbols and music, but none of them was religious, perhaps because of the fear of superimposing Christian sources upon an already Christian worship space and thus being inhospitable to our Buddhist guest. On his way to the pulpit to speak, the Dalai Lama bowed down to the cross and made a sign of reverence. That was a powerful gesture with deep meaning. On another occasion at Union Theological Seminary, Farid Esack, a Muslim scholar and liberation theologian, recited his Muslim prayers in St. James Chapel in Arabic, in the presence of people of different faiths and religious traditions. Were we only watching? Were we praying with him by praying through him? We must ask again: Can we pray each other’s prayers? Prayers are the containers of our innermost desires, the treasures of our communication with God, and the beliefs that we hold onto as the source of our identity as Christians. If we are to say somebody else’s prayers, are we uttering somebody else’s desires and speaking a new tongue? The potentially frightening and unsettling feeling in and among people praying somebody else’s prayers is a reality, and the risks are high. Why don’t we just leave those prayers alone, so that each tradition can say their own prayers for themselves? This connection, one fears, could cause more harm than healing. Nonetheless, a possible “yes” filled with challenges is also laden with apparent impossibilities. In some ways, it might seem impossible to pray the prayers of others, and it might not even be the right thing to do. The main problem for this conversation can be summed up in one word: appropriation. We must be aware of the interconnection of power, history, and colonization, and the continuing appropriation and misappropriations of colonized people’s theologies, celebrations, and traditions. We must be aware that when we are borrowing prayers, or even making somebody else’s prayers our own, we might be continuing this practice of colonial appropriation. So the dangers of my proposal may be insurmountable, and the perils ever present. Thus, at the onset of our trajectory of praying together, we must announce in a loud prayer voice (in symbolic and other concrete ways) that when we stand before somebody else from a different religion, we are marked by our inherent inability to access this other religion. Not only are we likely unfamiliar with the core of a particular religion, but we also do not have the particular practice or life of another religion, steeped in its blessings, gifts, and demands. The irreducibility of somebody else’s religion, the unavoidable appropriation of my sister’s and brother’s prayers and meaning, are always at stake. We must be aware of all of the colonial traces inside of us that want to repeat the trauma, as well as the control, of the colonizing conscious and unconscious process. To avoid this danger, we should search for social gatherings and rituals that will help us pray each other’s prayers in each other’s presence. Appropriation is the use of somebody else’s prayers and stories without the presence of the other, without care for the other, without commitment to the life of somebody else, without engagement in each other’s lives. What I am exploring here is the possibility of living together through our pray ers. We must begin by considering that when religious people utter a prayer, they have in mind some sense of their deity, their gods, and they are often loyal to this God and to this God alone. To pray somebody else’s prayer could mean offering ourselves to a different god, being entangled in other religious practices devoted to that other God, and this offer and practice could signify betrayal for some religious people. It could also lead some to a diminishment or lack of strong faith and even to a commitment to a God and a community not their own. That is because the logic of prayer is often marked by an exclusionary commitment to one’s own God. Thus, in order to pray each other’s prayers, we must assume that there is indeed some sense of disruption, or to use a better word, an expansion of our commitments. Therefore we must ask: can we keep our oath to Jesus Christ if we pray to Buddha, or Allah, or an Orixa? 130 Is the other totally other? Are there possible intersection points between our language about and gestures towards the divine? In my Christian upbringing, I was taught to consider people of other religions as the targets of my evangelism. They were all going to hell without knowing it, and I was chosen by God to save them. They were also an obstacle to the conquering Christianity in which I believed, a Christianity that caused me to live in a jumble of compassion, fear, and anger. The binary they-versus-us provided me with poles that shaped my thinking. It was much later that I learned that people of other religions could also be my brothers and sisters, and that their way of worshipping God and their God were to be respected. I even learned that I needed to engage in dialogue with them. However, it was only within the last decade that I realized that this dialogue entailed a much deeper commitment on my part. In order to engage in dialogue, I had to go a step further and venture into a conversation that demanded not only respect and acceptance, but also presence and a willingness to turn what was foreign to me into something familiar. But how could I do that? Timothy Wright’s book No Peace without Prayer: Encouraging Muslims and Christians to Pray Together; a Benedictine Approach can help us here. 131 Wright starts from a Benedictine understanding of spirituality and engages a Muslim spiritual perspective in order to find common ground between the two. A deep connection emerges out of this dialogue because the author is not afraid to learn about the Muslim tradition while also exploring a deeper understanding of his own tradition. In this double commitment, Wright brings forth common issues such as healing, remembering God, living in the presence of God, spiritually experiencing God, understanding God’s revelation and human responses to it, and finding ways that communities can experience and support each other through a dialogue on spirituality. One simple way in which he engages these two religions is through daily prayers. In this model he offers, Christians and Muslims pray several times during the day, and each prayer has specific requirements to be remembered for the saying of each prayer. Pairing the daily prayers of Christians and Muslims shows that these two forms of faithful practice can be done in such a way that each religion can enlighten, empower, and enrich the other. After describing the practice, Wright notes, “This advice offered here from the Christian and Muslim viewpoints is helpful: it starts to build bridges before any dialogue can start.... At one level, it is the commitment of faith by the participants that will take the dialogue forward.” 132 The key aspect of any interreligious conversation is open engagement with the specificities of each faith. Fear is a monster that keeps us disconnected from each other. We are bombarded daily with news that portrays people who do not look like us as frightening and as potential destroyers not only of our faith, but of ourselves and our world. Thus, in order to engage with someone else’s faith, we need to have a more mature personal faith, trusting that God’s love is bigger than our differences with our neighbors. For Christians, this involves trust that we are so loved by God that we can engage in any interreligious dialogue. Also, because this love of God demands that we love our neighbor, we lose the fear of approaching, getting closer, and offering ourselves in love and care. This unwavering love and this precious grace received are the ground from which we can go out into the world and work and hope for the restoration of the earth and the empowerment of our neighbors. Love is what sets us free, giving us freedom to see and acknowledge similarities and differences between our faith and that of others. Any good interreligious dialogue must start with the full affirmation of one’s faith. From there, we must find space between us for a(n) un/common ground, a moveable place where we might kneel or dance, praying together. From this place, we can either pray our own prayers with somebody else, or, if we are able to venture a little further, we might be taught how to pray someone else’s prayers. As I try to pray somebody else’s prayer, my challenge has to do more with my own trust in my God in this process than the fear that somebody else’s prayer will do something to me, my relationships, and my commitments. In the economy of my community’s faith, would God still relate to me if I prayed to a God who does not have the name of the one to whom I usually pray? The ecos / oikos /household of God in the Christian faith contains a nomos, a law, that embraces everything. Nothing and nobody is outside of the love—the house—and the nomos of God. In this loving house, we have to strive for peace and mutual dignity and recognize that in this space, the name of our utmost desire will be blessed and anointed. In this house, my supplications that once were for the salvation of other religious people now include myself. We need each other, and our common prayers of supplication are a sustaining part of this “inescapable network of mutuality,” as Martin Luther King Jr. wrote. 133 Mutual salvation, collective redemption, common solidarity, one world house for all? Perhaps! We can indeed look at our Christian faith for help in creating the conditions that would allow this sharing of prayers to happen. My Experience with Candomblé and the Christian-African Religious Dialogue In order to wear this garment of mutuality, in order to tradition the hope of the Christian faith, I want to pray with Afro-Brazilians. By doing that, I believe that I, along with others, will be able to honor, love, and restore a word of justice to the Black people of my country. Candomblé is a religion that came with Africans to Brazil and continued to be practiced by them throughout the era of slavery and colonialism. As an oral religion, it was able to survive and continue its practices, even though it has changed and become an indigenous Brazilian religion. The history of Brazil cannot be told without remembering the history of slavery and the white manufacturing of the racism so rampant in that country’s society today. That history is embedded in the daily lives of people in myriad ways. For instance, I grew up thinking that every African religion—surely made up by Black people—was a creation of the devil, and that every one of its practices was infested by demons. I was taught to evangelize its practitioners and cast away their demons. Along with my white Christian religious education from the United States, there was a racist underpinning that gave support to my hatred and deepest fear (of what or of whom?). This same hatred and fear has been institutionalized in exclusionary ways within Brazilian society, and the new Pentecostal churches’ mission goals include the destruction of a certain number of African American houses of worship. It was in the city of Salvador, in Bahia, the Brazilian state with the country’s largest Black population, that I discovered that this hatred and fear lives in my body, a realization by which I have been forever transformed. While I was there, I acted as the interpreter for Professor Emilie Townes’s class from Union Theological Seminary. During our visit, we were supposed to engage with and meet practitioners of Afro-Brazilian religions, and in one of these visits we were scheduled to go to a Candomblé worship service. There, the mãe de santo (the mother of the saint), who is the pastor and leader of the religious community, was supposed to throw beads and bring the voices of the Orixas to each student, and I was in charge of translating what the Orixas wanted to tell the person. However, as we were getting into the van, my body froze, and I could not move. For a couple of minutes, I had no control over my body. A friend who was with us, a Brazilian Methodist pastor who was also a member of Candomblé, told me that I was going to be all right. Slowly, my body went back to normal, and I was able to get into the van and go to the place of worship. Wondering why my body froze unexpectedly, I realized that while my mind had made the journey from wanting to save this group to desiring to learn with and from them, my body was still dominated by a narrative of fear. My body had learned for so many years that I should fear these people, that they were possessed by demons, and that I could die in their presence, that it was telling me, “I am not going to expose us to this danger!” This experience changed my life, my scholarship, and my way of thinking about interreligious dialogue. From that day on, I have been challenged to think about interreligious dialogue from the perspective of religious rituals and of presence in practices, and not just from a sociological, theological, or even scriptural viewpoint. It is exceedingly difficult to engage varying religious practices, for the spaces in which they occur can be dangerous due to their religious codes and specificities. For example, in some Candomblé festivities, if I wear anything Black, I can disrupt the movement of the Orixas. For me to engage in this internal and external dialogue is to recover what I have destroyed and to engage in a national movement of recovering the Brazilian soul, honoring African Brazilians, and protecting not only the Axé people—the people who belong to the Afro-Brazilian religions—but also the imperiled lives of Afro-Brazilians in general, who make up more than half of the Brazilian population. The elimination of Black people in Brazil continues. Black boys are being killed every day throughout Brazil, just because they are Black in a deeply racist country. Thus to engage in an interreligious dialogue has a more expansive way of being in solidarity with Black people. From a more theoretical perspective, the Chilean-Peruvian theologian Diego Irarrázaval offers Christians four main points of dialogue between Christian and Afro-Brazilian religions: 1. to celebrate and to think with an understanding that the celebratory ways of African religions are ways of thinking, of constructing the lives of their members, and of re-creating the world; 2. to identify ourselves and our continent as African-American, calling ourselves Africans so as to help us embrace the life, history, and depth of African religion as common to us all; 3. to celebrate the mystery of the African way, which is the celebration of the sacred in our bodies, and to realize that the body is a privileged place for the revelation of the sacred; and 4. to wrestle with syncretism and belongings. 134 Given Brazil’s history of slavery and its pervasive racism, can we provide a space of reconciliation and hospitality through common prayers? We might think about that by reflecting on a certain common pneumatology. It Is the Spirit That Makes Us Pray: Holy Spirit/ Axé Every beginning depends upon the Spirit, both for Candomblé and for many Christians. It is the Holy Spirit that initiates God’s love in us and prepares and empowers us to live this love in the world. Communal acts of praise and work dedicated to God are always a response to God’s love, generosity, and demands. For Candomblé, the Orixas and other entities move the world’s energies and make us respond to their calls and demands. Thus, the very reason for worship in both the Christian and Candomblé faiths is the movement and call of the Spirit/ Axé in people’s lives. Prayer is an act of praise and gratitude. Because people of both religions depend on the work of the Axé /Holy Spirit, it is to God that they go with petitions. In both religions, there is common food and common good for the people, in Eucharist and in food offering, and under the power of the Holy Spirit and Axé, people gather as strangers and become a family. The presence of the Holy Spirit offers forgiveness, healing, and reconciliation through common worship, meal, and bath, even if they are continuously interrupted by fear, hatred, anxiety, injustice, death, and the perils and conflicts of the world. For Candomblé, the presence of Axé also balances the level of bad and good energies in the local communities through offerings and dances. Since God is the one who manifests Godself where God wants, and makes a covenant with whomever God wants, we are the ones, inspired by the Holy Spirit, who can create channels for God’s grace to be experienced in ways that we may not yet have been able to experience. Thus, we are trying to find ways in which the covenant of God can be expanded and in which we can offer hospitality to people of other faiths. We can become channels of God’s incarnation. For practitioners of Candomblé, the communal living out of the faith involves channels of blessings and healings to the community. The dances and offerings are forms of sacrament where the Orixas organize the world of the living, protecting those who are searching to balance their energy and making others pay for the unbalance of the energies brought about by their actions. In worship, Christians have their Bibles, sing their songs, and pray their prayers, praying “Come, Spirit, Come.” However, in this dangerou s prayer the coming of the Spirit might do something we do not want or like, and the Spirit can arrive as the coming of a stranger, a guest, one whom we were not expecting or even desiring. Once we pray “Come, Spirit, Come,” the movement of the Spirit can no longer be controlled. After our prayer, we might have to welcome members of the Candomblé faithful dressed in their white dresses, dancing and singing, asking for the Orixas to come and move energies through the primal energy, Axé. 135 Once the Holy Spirit takes over, we must follow. The Holy Spirit and the Axé are the moving forces that establish, shift, and balance the world and all of our respective universes. The Holy Spirit and Axé can transform whatever they want and are the very source of life. Christians and Yoruba are totally dependent on the movements of Spirit and Axé, and they are the sources we tap into so that we can engage each other around the table and be able to expand our religious horizons. The engagement with Axé and the Holy Spirit can become a vital theological response to the globalized world we live in. The increasing sense of dislocation marked by the growing flow of people around the globe, the hybridity of immigration, the accumulation of capital in the hands of fewer than five hundred people around the world, the trafficking of people, brutality against women, the shifting of labor markets, and the growing diversity of local neighborhoods are just some of the signs demanding that our theologies and communities deal with the constant flow of identities and “mobile personalities” 136 that characterize our era. The force, potency, and agency of the Holy Spirit/ Axé can help us engage these challenges and dismantle deadly world realities. The Holy Spirit/ Axé can also help us find plural identities, not in the de-ritualizing of our own religious rituals, but rather, in the renewing processes of the ritualization of our beliefs (the expansion of our rituals) as we encounter others along the way. The Spirit of God shows itself through movements of unfolding openness and alterity, movements marked by dis/placements of generosities. The Spirit of God must be seen in my responsibility to myself, but always in relation to some-body-else, even if this some-body-else throws me into an abyss of inescapable inner and outer challenges. The presence of some-body-else at the table of Jesus Christ connects me to unexpected obligations toward this other and to that person’s people, a people that I might not have paid attention to until that moment. Thus, the movement of the Spirit in us can be a call to us to pay attention to some-body-else. From this place of unexpected openness given by the Spirit, Christians can find common ground to welcome practitioners of Candomblé. Common elements for a theology of the Spirit in Christianity and Candomblé include: ( 1 ) the Holy Spirit/ Axé has a deep connection with the body, and without our bodies there is no community. In both religions, the Spirit/ Orixas can possess bodies. ( 2 ) The Holy Spirit and Axé and the Orixas help us not only to deal with our daily life, our struggles, and our wounds, but also give us strength, wisdom, and vision to go through life. ( 3 ) The Holy Spirit/ Axé always engages with a guest or visitor. ( 4 ) The Holy Spirit/Axé is deeply connected with creation. ( 5 ) It is the Holy Spirit/ Axé who creates and sustains the gathered communities. And ( 6 ) the presence of the Spirit/ Axé is manifested in both worship and work. Candomblé and Christian believers pray to the Holy Spirit and to Orixas for guidance and wisdom in their daily lives. Both groups of believers bless the Spirit and endeavor to walk in their daily life in ways pleasing to the Holy Spirit/ Orixas. Both religions have a deep commitment to the transformation of society through their beliefs and practices. For both religions, God is always doing something through us. Or, to use J. Edgar Bruns’s words, “God is the doing of something” 137 in our religions. It is in, under, through, and around the Spirit/ Orixas in our diverse bodies and rituals that we can recreate our daily and common life within and among ourselves. In both religions, God/the Orixas are doing something in and through us, and we are also doing something in and through our worship, recreating the world, recreating life. As Jaci Maraschin says, “It is in the body that we are spirit especially when our bodies are ready to recreate life. Let us, then, make of our bodies our main instrument of worship.” 138 Open to the unknown movements of the Spirit and Axé, we move along together. In order to pray with people of Axé, Christians first need to walk towards adherents of Candomblé, combat the racism that formed most of Brazil, and undo the demonization of the Axé people. This movement is what Derrida calls un certain pas, a certain step (or “a particular step,” “a given step”) moving from one place to another. The movement forward entails working within a given context. In general, in Brazil, depending on the specificities of each local context, this work would entail: 1. Christians starting to pray for Axé people in their own worship services: Christians praying not for the salvation of the people of Axé but for the continuation of their long history of gifts and blessings to Brazil. Everything starts in the body, praying as a way to cast away from our bodies the prejudices, bigotry, fear, and racism that live in our bodies. To pray with and for Yoruba people is to undo centuries of hatred and fear in our bodies. Our bodies, along with our minds and hearts, have to learn to pray in a very different way. 2. Christians encircling places of Axé worship to protect those inside from other Christians who see them as the devil. 3. Christians visiting the worship places of people of Axé, learning how practitioners of Candomblé pray and dance and what their offerings mean. Being with them, staying with them when possible, learning to see the power, beauty, and glory of the Yoruba people, Orixas and Olorun. 4. Christians inviting Axé people into their worship spaces to share prayers and common celebrations. 5. Christians and Axé getting together for a meal and to share stories. 6. Christians and Axé teaching each other daily prayers for comfort and protection, blessings for the house, a new job, a birth, an illness, and other life events. By loving the Axé people, Christians will learn that love can cast away fear. By loving and creating bridges of connections, dismantling our racism, decolonizing our faith, disrupting our theologies, and undoing our fears, we might be able to pray together. Or, by praying together, we might be better equipped to love, and thus, to dismantle our racism, disrupt our theologies, and undo our fears. This interreligious dialogue is not for the sake of the dialogue itself. Rather, it must be done for the sake of life together! Conclusion: Worship Comes After If we are to think, form, and practice a ministry that can create possibilities for people to pray the prayers of others and to live interreligiously through rituals, we must know that rituals and liturgies never stand alone. Often, rituals are a secondary event in the life of a community. People gather because of friendship, because of a particular issue, because they need to find small forms of social organization. A community gathers because of a need for a place to be, to relate, to search for meaning, to help, and to be protected. In the same way, it is our mutual responsibility to each other that brings us together. After that come our rituals and worship, our shared prayers and singing. In order to pray together, we need to dance and eat together and get to know each other’s lives and faith. We must enter into a common interreligious mystagogical place where we teach and learn together how and what and where to pray. By expanding our religious education, and decolonizing our faith, we will be able to shift the places of trust, and thus the place of God, away from structures of power that set us apart to places of mutual confidence in local structures. This can be accomplished through the resources we have received and with those we already have in our communities. Prayer is about getting to know who we are and what our common situation is so that we can offer supplications for each other. What Paulo Freire writes about education—“Things to know, how to know, what to know, for what and whom to know and therefore against whom and what to know” 139 —can also be said about prayer: “Things to pray, how to pray, what to pray, for what and whom to pray and therefore against whom and what to pray.” This is our mission as people of faith. Releasing our fear, we might begin to see that there are not only points of connection between these two religions, but also significantly different views of the world and gifts of life. Perhaps the Christian catechumenal process could include the stories and the dances and songs of those who practice Candomblé. Perhaps adherents of Candomblé could learn some of the Christian prayers. Everything starts with the praxis of the people, its challenges, and its needs. We start with life and friendships. From there, people engage cultural and faith traditions, other important sources, and then move, or step, beyond themselves towards each other. The place to meet is in the middle, where nobody owns anything and where our prayers can then become a common place of sharing and learning. We are called to cross borders and limits. There must be “a certain step” beyond ourselves towards somebody else. This step beyond ourselves is a Christian demand, a step that embodies our faith, a movement towards the world and its people. What Jacques Derrida calls “the step beyond and not beyond” 140 is both a step toward somebody and a step of the other toward me. Both are movements toward my life to which I must respond. Alterity is all around us when we pray. My prayers of supplication can be this very step “beyond and not beyond,” a movement that invites my neighbor and exposes me to a situation where I am prohibited from shutting down, from living in my own bubble. My prayers are a way to care for the world and all that is in it. Shall we pray? 125. An earlier version of this essay was published in Carvalhaes, Eucharist and Globalization, 203 – 41. A version was also published as Carvalhaes, “Praying Each Other’s Prayers.” 126. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 68. 127. Van Fleteren, “Interpretation, Assimilation, Appropriation,” 270 – 85. 128. Espín, Idol and Grace, xv. 129. Espín, Idol and Grace. 130. Reginaldo Prandi writes of the Orixas, “For traditional Yoruba and Yoruba followers in the Americas, Orixás are gods who received from Olodumare or Olorum, also called Olofim in Cuba, the Supreme Being, the task of creating and governing the world, each one of them responsible for specific aspects of nature and certain dimensions of life in society as well as the understating of the human condition. In Africa, most Orixas are circumscribed to a certain city or region, while a few receive worship mostly throughout the entire extension of the Yoruba lands. Many Orixás are forgotten, others appear in new cults.” Prandi, Mitologia dos Orixás, 20. My translation. 131. Wright, No Peace without Prayer. 132. Wright, No Peace without Prayer, 312. 133. Wright, No Peace without Prayer, xvi. 134. Irarrázaval, “Salvação Indígena y Afro-Americana,” 69. 135. “Axé is the primal force, life principle, sacred force of the Orixás... it is power, it is charisma, it is the root that comes from the ancestors; we can gain and lose Axé, Axé is a gift from the gods... it is above all, the very house of the Candomblé, the temple, the roça (place where you plant for and with your family) the whole tradition.” Prandi, Os Candomblés de São Paulo, 103 – 4. My translation. 136. See Betcher, “Take My Yoga upon You,” 58. 137. Cited by Betcher, “Take My Yoga upon You,” 72. 138. Maraschin, “The Transient Body.” 139. Freire, Cartas à Guiné-Bissau, loc. 271, Apple Books. 140. Derrida defines this step: “The crossing of borders always announces itself according to the movement of a certain step [Fr. un certain pas ]” ( Aporias, 11 ). This step entails a step beyond and not beyond. John Caputo explains it: “The step not beyond is the necessity and impossibility of approaching the other; it means to approach the inappropriable, to approach without appropriation” ( Prayers and Tears of Jacques Derrida, 84 ). See also Derrida, Psyche, and Derrida, Parages. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.