1 Praying with the World at Heart Prayer is an invitation to God to intervene in our lives, to let [God’s] will prevail in our affairs; it is the opening of a window to [God] in our will, an effort to make [God] the Lord of our soul. We submit our interests to [God’s] concern and seek to be allied with what is ultimately right. Our approach to the holy is not an intrusion but an answer. —Abraham Joshua Heschel 1 W here do we start when we pray? Where are the places that we go to pray? What sources do we use to pray? What do we pay attention to when we pray? What theologies, gestures, bodies, communities, commitments inform our prayers? Where does our grammar for prayer come from? To talk about prayers is to talk about that which gives us life. Prayers have the power to create, transform, and hold our worlds together. When I was growing up, my mother would repeat a phrase that I think is from E. M. Bounds, but was used by Billy Graham: “Much prayer, much power. Little prayer, little power. No prayer, no power.” My mother has always been a woman of prayer, and if I know the power of prayer today, it is because of her own devotion to prayer. She prayed without ceasing. My mother would never let me leave the house without a prayer and always reminded me to pray before going to bed. These habits are still within me. Lately, praying has become both easier and more difficult. It has become easier because I do not carry the anxiety I once had to see my prayers answered. I somewhat know, especially when I am not suffering, that God will do whatever God wants to do. On the other hand, it has become increasingly more difficult to pray because there are so many disasters piling up in our world today that I do not know what to pray for. Prayer holds together aspects of both agency and powerlessness. In any case, we are called to pray. When I was in my early teenage years, my father gave me a globe with the map of the world. I used to pray holding the globe in my arms, next to my heart. I learned that I always had to pray for the salvation of the world. To this day, I still pray with the world close to my heart. We pray not because God needs our prayers but because the world needs our prayers. My prayer life has been marked by both the brutality and the gentleness of our daily lives, by the un/bearable, un/framed materiality of our glorious and disastrous reality, by the heaviness and lightness of our bodies, a dizzying search for answers, and awareness of what I should pay attention to when I pray. Below, throughout this chapter, you will see an array of prayer sources. They create, perhaps, an unrecognized theological discourse embedded in a heart filled with vast blessings and emotions and a mind tormented again and again by the disasters of the world and the life of the poor. The events of the world both shrink and expand a faith that longs for a new time and a healed world, where the poor find food and shelter, the economic powers come tumbling down, the afflicted find some solace, and those that are overly comfortable become disturbed by the burning events of our days. I always pray with my community with a broken heart, wrestling with my own faith or lack thereof. While I am still far from “be still my soul...” I am learning how to pray. Slowly. People are in the midst of life and death right now as we read and pray. We have always to pray more. Prayers do have the power to change things! For I believe that “much prayer, much power. Little prayer, little power. No prayer, no power.” Lost Grace She was at the counter of a drugstore waiting for the medicine. In her arms, her daughter was sleeping. In her hands, a torn paper, the prescription given by a doctor. After a while, the pharmacist came to her and said, “I am sorry, you don’t have insurance, we cannot give you the medicine.” She did not understand and said, “Medicine for my daughter. Please.” The man repeated: “I am sorry, you don’t have health insurance; can you pay?” “Yes, yes,” she said, and the pharmacist replied: “It is four hundred and fifty dollars.” She opened her purse and while holding her exhausted sleeping daughter, she extracted from the purse twelve dollars and thirty-seven cents. While she was putting the money on the counter, with some difficulty, the pharmacist said: “Ma’am, I am sorry, this medicine is too expensive.” She extended her arm, making the sign “wait” with her hand while trying to find more money at the bottom of her purse. The pharmacist was embarrassed and the people in line behind the woman were starting to lose their patience. The woman found a couple of nickels and added them to the rest of the money she had placed on the counter. The man said: “I am sorry, this is not enough.” The woman said, “Take it, please. Everything,” she said. “Medicine, please.” “I am sorry” the pharmacist replied, “but this is not enough. Please step outside of the line. I need to help the people in line.” The woman said, “Medicine please, my daughter sick, very sick.” “Please step aside,” said the now impatient pharmacist. The mother did not understand and her exhausted face was filled with fear. “Please, doctor, please,” she said. A man in line took the money from the counter and tried to give it to her, but she refused: “No, please take, medicine for my daughter, very sick, very sick.” The man opened her purse and threw the money inside. “Please step aside!” the other customer screamed. The woman stepped aside, saying, “Please medicine, my daughter very sick. Please.” The pharmacist and the people in the line started to act as if she was not there and kept tending to their business. The woman started to scream, “Medicine, please!” while trying to get the money back out of her purse. The pharmacist said, “Ma’am, if you continue to scream, I will have to call security.” The woman sobbed, “Sorry, sorry, medicine please, medicine please. My daughter... ” While she was crying, she went through the line asking people, “Money please, my daughter very sick, look,” showing them the prescription given to her by the doctor. The people in line started to complain, saying she was bothering everyone, and the pharmacist called security. “No, please,” she said, “medicine only. I go, please medicine my daughter very sick, I go, I go.” Two security guards came, and the woman began wailing so loud that she woke her daughter. Both were crying when the security guards took her, this 5 ’ 5 ” woman with her four-year-old daughter in her arms. As the security guards were taking her out, she cried even louder: “Señor Jesus, ten piedad, ten piedad! Ten piedad Señor Jesús, mi hija está tan enfermita, por favor les pido que me dé la medicina que mi hija necesita. Por favor, por favor, Jesucristo!” And she was taken away from the drugstore and placed on the street with the two guards securing the door. She sat on the cold street. She and her daughter were crying, and she was praying, “Jesucristo, ten piedad.” Jesus Christ, have mercy. Her prayers were never answered. It appears that God did not have mercy on her. Her daughter went without medicine. Can we say that God had mercy on her? How so? Who was to blame? God? The easy way out is to say that if she were not here illegally, she would not have to go through this. But she was a citizen of this country. We are the arms and legs, hands and eyes, mouths and ears of God’s answer. The mother’s prayer will never be answered if not through us. Thus, prayer is an exercise in becoming, in our bodies, through our feelings, breathing, and thoughts, always available to the poor. To pray to God is to become that which we pray for. To sing the Kyrie —“Have mercy, Lord!”—every week in Christian worship services is to become, by God’s grace, God’s merciful flesh in the world for the lowly, for those who have no agency, no access, no voice, no place in the world. To pray thus is an act of love, love for God, love for my brothers and sisters, love for the world. To learn to pray is to learn how to become Christ in the world. To learn how to pray is to walk around in the world with our hearts outside of our bodies, witnessing the least of these being mercilessly crushed. To learn how to pray is to find ways to change things and create conditions of an honored and blessed life for all. Prayer is to make laws that change the mother’s situation. Prayer is the opposite of throwing the mother out on the street. It is a whole economic system that demands dignified life for all. And nothing less than that! Politically, socially, culturally, to pray is to become God’s love for “the least of these.” I will not learn how to pray until I learn how to serve, how to commit to those less favored, how to make sure that the poor are cared for, attended to by the mercy of God in and through us. Until this woman receives medicine for her daughter, I will never learn how to pray. Every time a prayer like the one this woman uttered is unanswered, a grace is lost. Sadly, we live amidst “lost graces,” 2 possibilities of God’s tangible manifestation in our midst, offered to us in order to expand us, to help us become more committed Christians and better humans, but we don’t pray, we often miss these opportunities. Lost graces are God’s graces offered to us and to which we do not pay attention because we do not pay attention to the poor. We do not have eyes to see, ears to hear, hands to touch, arms to embrace, or boldness to fight for the right causes with the poor. The Theological Weight of the Circumstances The Brazilian theologian Ivone Gebara said in a recent article published in Brazil: “In general, theologians reflect very little of the poetic expression of the joys and pain of Christian communities. There is a distance between the work of those who analyze the contents of the religious tradition of our days and those who are responsible for the animation of the community, its feasts and weekly celebrations.” 3 Gebara is right. Theologians reflect mostly on the high dogmatics of our theological systems, engage with the philosophical aspects of our beliefs, the historical and linguistic aspects of our creeds, the articles of our books of order, our liturgies and confessions. We do not, however, give much attention to the full exuberance of matters that affect the daily lives of people: the price of the bus or the daily bread, the violence on the streets, the symbols in people’s houses, their music, their love life, their joys and dreams. Theologians do not, for the most part, wrestle with people’s pains. Whether theologians pray or not, people’s daily lives do not often find themselves in our theological books or liturgical books. Perhaps Gebara says this because her daily life is interrupted by the daily affairs of the people. She cannot seclude herself in a writing retreat. Instead, she always has to stop her writing or research because in the community where she has chosen to live, a couple started a fight, a woman was raped, or children could not get food at school. In her theology, the relationality of people is what helps her understand who God might be and it is in the tapestry of life that God appears and acts in people’s lives. Getting deeply involved in the daily life of people, theology must become the breathing of the joys and pains of the people. God has no reason to be/come if not reasoned through the lives of the poor, where God is be/coming all the time. Becoming acquainted with people’s daily lives helps us gain a new grammar of faith, and thus a new grammar for our prayers. Gebara writes, “The world of our circumstances is our life, with its grandeurs and personal and relational miseries. It is from this world that our prayers and our music, even the most sublime ones, are born.” 4 The lex orandi (law of prayer) is born out of the law of life ( lex vivendi ), the daily life of the poor, as it gives shape to their joys, concerns, and beliefs ( lex credendi, the law of belief). The task for theologians is to attend to the lex orandi-vivendi-credendi of the poor, listening to their prayers and learning with them how to properly pray. It is there, rather than in our liturgical books, that we can find the most powerful and sublime prayers, hymns, and affirmations of faith. There, in the midst of the struggle for justice with the poor, we learn the ethics we need to judge, act, and live. These, Gebara reports, are some of the sayings people say and pray: I believe that the world will be better when the smallest one who suffers believes in the small. You are the God of the poor, a human and small God who sleeps on the streets, God of a torn face. To receive Communion with this suffering people is to make an alliance with the oppressed people. All of sudden, our eyes cleared out, cleared out, cleared out! And we discovered that the poor has value, has value, has value! The people of God marched to the promised land. Moses was walking ahead of them. Today we are Moses when we face the oppressor. I have so many brothers I can’t count, and a beautiful sister whose name is freedom. 5 These sayings and prayers, like daily actions, feed utopias and transform the world. Holding the World with Affection For a Protestant boy like me, it was a surprise to discover a monastery of Protestant nuns in the midst of the mountains in Europe. I always thought that only Roman Catholics had monasteries. And I could never figure out why people would give their lives to be inside of a monastery. Spending a few days with those nuns transformed my vision. In one conversation, I asked them: “Why do you stay here? What is the purpose of your giving your life to live here?” One of the nuns replied, “We are here to pray for the world every day. There are so many people going through pain, turmoil, and suffering, we must tend them, we must care for them, we must stand before God on their behalf. God does not need us to do it, but these people might need us. We hold all of the suffering and the world in our prayers with affection.” Gratitude and Forgiveness To be grateful in life is a constant challenge. That is why I love to receive communion every week: because it forces me to see the ways that God is blessing my life and I must be thankful no matter what I am going through. At the eucharistic table I must say “God, thank you!” At the table I must learn with the early Christians who organized their prayers around gratitude and forgiveness. At the table I learn with my brothers and sisters that I have been blessed. If I can learn to wrap my days as well as my heart around prayers of gratitude and petitions of mercy, I will gain a kind of wisdom that will help me go through life better. Every day, at least three times a day, I must utter a prayer of gratitude and beg for forgiveness. Life is better lived if through Eucharistia and Kyrie, thanksgiving and mercy. God have mercy, thanks be to God! Reconstructing Past, Present, and Future Our prayers have the power to recreate the past, reshape the present, and invent a future where the Reign of God can happen. Time and time again, we must create prayers that take the conditions of the world, inform us of the tragedies of the world, and offer a new way of being, acting, hoping, learning, and believing. Pedro Casaldáliga, a prophetic bishop in Brazil, wrote a mass to celebrate the past-present-future of the Quilombolas, heirs of African slaves in Brazil. In this prayer, past, present, and future are remembered, renamed, reframed, and reorganized. The mass begins with the following prayer: 6 We are coming from the bottom of the earth, coming from the womb of night, made into meat at the butcher, we have come to remember. We are coming from the death of the seas, coming from the dark and muddy basements, heirs of the banzo 7 we are, we have come to cry. We are coming from the black rosaries, coming from our terreiros, 8 from the cursed saints we are, we have come to pray. We are coming from the shop floor, coming from sounds and shapes, of art denied we are, we have come to create. We are coming from the depths of fear, coming from the deaf currents a long lament we are, we have come to praise. A de Ó (Recited) From the Exile of life, the mines at night, the meat sold, the Law of the Scourge, the banzo of the seas... to the new albores! 9 we go to Palmares 10 with all the drums! We are coming from the rich stoves, coming from the poor brothels, of sold meat we are, we have come to love. We are coming from the old slave quarters, Coming to the new slums, of the margins of the world we are, we have come to dance. We are coming from the trains of the suburbs, coming in crazy pendants, with life between the teeth we arrive, we have come to sing. We are coming from the big stadiums, coming from samba schools, dancing the samba of rebellion we come, we have come to sway. We are coming from the womb of Minas coming from the sad mocambos, 11 of silent cries silent we are, We have come to charge. We are coming from the cross of the power mills, We are bleeding the cross of Baptism, tagged by iron we were, We have come to scream. We are coming from the top of the hills, coming from the lower parts of the law, from the unnamed graves we arrived We have come to cry out loud. We are coming from the ground of the Quilombos, 12 coming from the sound of drums, the new Palmares we are, We have come to fight. These prayers, said in unison, shape not only people of African descent in Brazil but also fall upon the whole society of Brazil as a form of history from below, a way of telling white folks what coloniality did to the precious Black people of Brazil. The whole prayer is structured around “We have come from” and “we have come to,” showing not only the diverse origins of the people who are praying but also the places they are going now, opening up spaces of creation and life in the present. Naming who they are, they embrace their past of utter pain and struggle and prepare the way for a future of struggle empowered by their ancestors, organized by their songs, energized by their gifts, strength, wisdom, and all of the movements of their souls and bodies. Such a prayer has the power to scare away the white patriarchalism and racism still in place in Brazilian society and to create a new world of justice and hope, one that is already happening under the feet of those who are praying. Stepping onto this new holy ground, their and our holy ground, all of us in Brazil are impacted by its power, the power of this holy ground and holy people. By praying the Quilombos’ prayers with them, I learn to honor them. I dance with them. I sing with them as I become one of them, loving them deeply and fighting now the same fight of justice and hope. That is why we must pray each other’s prayers! Psalms My mother taught me the best way to contextualize the use of the Psalms for our days. Here is a story that my fifty-six-year-old brother Joe told me about Psalm 121. For almost four years Joe could not find a job and his situation was getting worse and worse. He lost a very good job he had, then he lost his car, and he was several months late on his house payments. His wife got sick, his daughter had to stop going to school, and in spite of it all he went to the streets of São Paulo every day looking for any job he could find. His shoes had holes in them. One day, he went to my mother’s house for lunch. There is a long corridor from the gate at the street to the door of her house. He rang the bell and entered. As he walked towards our mother, his head was down, his body tired. Our mother went to meet him and as soon as she saw him walking down the corridor she called, “Son, look up! Look up right now! I ain’t gonna let you look down this way!” He was absolutely exhausted, his soul and body beaten up, lonely, with no strength or hope to continue anymore. Our mother approached Joe, held his head up with her small but strong hands and said: “Look up, son! For your help will come from the Lord...” He started to cry and could barely stay standing. My eighty-year-old mother had to hold his body and crying with him she said, “Look up and say with me: ‘I lift up my eyes to the hills—from where will my help come? My help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.’” Joe could not say a word, but my mother said: “I am going to continue to say it until you say it with me: come on... I lift up my eyes to the hills... Say it... ‘I lift up my eyes to the hills—from where will my help come?’ With me now: ‘My help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.’” In the midst of tears of exhaustion, with his head still held up by my mother’s hands, Joe started to whisper some words with the salty taste of his tears: “I lift up my eyes... I lift up my eyes to the hills... I lift up my eyes to the hills... ” “Continue with me now, son: ‘My help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.’” And she continued the psalm for him. She knew it by heart: “He will not let your foot be moved; he who keeps you will not slumber. He who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade at your right hand. The sun shall not strike you by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord will keep you from all evil; he will keep your life. The Lord will keep your going out and your coming in from this time on and for evermore.” They ended up saying the whole psalm on their knees. “Look up!” With the help of Psalm 121, my mother was able to give my brother perspective, new hopes, and empowerment. By re-positioning my brother’s body, she helped him reposition his soul and his mind towards God. With his head up, he could see God’s vastness beyond his immediate surroundings and was reminded of God’s grace. He was able to add another possibility for his life, to let something new grow inside of him that did not exist before and bring a part of him back to life that was already killed by the adversities of life. Within a year of that day, his life changed. Today my brother has already retired. He and his family are doing well. Psalm 121, proclaimed by his almost illiterate mother, saved his life. Praying with Brothers and Sisters of Other Traditions If my references and prayer life were confined to the Christian tradition, my life would be narrow and my God incredibly small. While we have a wealth of prayers from many Christian churches throughout history, I believe we can gain more of life and of God if we learn to pray the prayers of sisters and brothers of other traditions. My work and my hope are that, increasingly, we will be able to pray each other’s prayers and sing each other’s songs, blessing ourselves with each other’s blessings. So I learned to pray in silence with a Buddhist cylindrical prayer wheel from Tibet. A spindle made of metal, the prayer wheel has a piece of paper inside with a mantra, a sacred phrase to be repeated by the one who prays. The way to pray is to spin the wheel. As we spin the wheel, it serves as a series of spoken prayers and spreads the prayers around the world. It is indeed a beautiful silent way of praying! The Brazilian theologian Leonardo Boff once said, “I prefer the silence of Buddha to the endless babbling of the theologians.” 13 I am challenged to learn to pray with Mahatma Gandhi, who said: “Prayer is not asking. It is a longing of the soul. It is daily admission of one’s weakness. It is better in prayer to have a heart without words than words without a heart.” The admission of my weakness can be compared with the Kyrie in the Christian tradition. Gandhi reminds us that what is at stake in prayer is what our heart carries, not exactly what we say. With Rumi, the thirteenth-century Persian poet, jurist, theologian, and Sufi mystic, I utter the words, “I am like a bird from another continent, sitting in this aviary. The day is coming when I will fly off, but who is it now in my ear who hears my voice? Who says words with my mouth?” 14 As a colonized foreigner, I never know whose voices I am speaking, who is whispering in my ear, and who is speaking the words in my mouth. Rumi helps me to pray and find a better way back to the multitude that I am. With Lalla Ded, a fourteenth-century mystic of the Kashmiri Shaivite sect, I learn to deal with my own darkness. I didn’t believe in it for a moment But I gulped down the wine of my own voice. And then I wrestled with the darkness inside me, Knocked it down, clawed at it, ripped it to shreds. 15 Our prayer life must learn to pray in another language, another religious tradition, another culture, and another heart, many other hearts. Endlessly. Until we finally learn how to pray. Praying without Ceasing My body is suffering It is my great torpor I am languishing I give you a thousand thanks, my Lord My bones are shaken up My shadow becomes invisible My soul is confused Pierce me, my Lord My God Open to me the gates Of eternal servitude Throw me your cholera (anger) 16 In the Temple of Zion. 17 A friend has problems with drug addiction. He stole almost everything that had value from his parents’ house in order to buy drugs. He is still wandering around the streets of Fortaleza, Brazil, but his parents do not even know if he is still alive. Another friend used to read the obituary section of the newspaper every morning to see if his son was still alive. Yet another friend had to visit her son in jail because addiction caused him to steal and be incarcerated. The proliferation of drugs throughout the world is consuming innumerable lives. The war against drug cartels initiated by the Clinton administration was a failure and it continues to have no results, even with the millions of dollars spent. The drug cartels rule over many places around the globe. Los Angeles is filled with drugs. Hong Kong lives under their rule. The streets of São Paulo are now filled with people dependent on crack. They live in a region nicknamed “Crackolandia,” in eternal servitude, living the cholera, the anger of life. The local state and other social and religious organizations are hopeless in their efforts to help them. The descent into drugs is a descent into hell and there are very few that make it back. How do we pray for and with them? How does our prayer create new ways to fight, to struggle, to find new life possibilities? How can we walk and pray with people in the grips of drug addiction? It is not only drugs. More and more our societies are inhabited by people with some kind of disorder. We live in brutal times, where the pressure for distinction and high expectations for success are combined with high anxieties and no space for failure or opportunity for gentleness. People living with addictions, disorders, and disabilities of many kinds face cruel hardships in life. People with mental illness are completely forgotten. 18 And then there are those who receive the news of terminal illness. Death opens its jaws while people are still living. Insults and violence, atrocities, death and lack of control, anger, life at the edge of the abyss. So many people go without help and so many people who want to help do not know what to do. Moreover, social threats in society run the risk of contributing to social collapse on a daily basis. People are trafficked and enslaved, children turn into soldiers, women are battered at every corner of the earth, and the news of disasters is relentless. My mother is now eighty-nine years old and she still visits my cousin in a mental institution every week. She also goes every week to a nursing home to pray for the elderly and visits hospital rooms, offering a prayer for the sick. In times of pain, prayer is fundamental. When we are in pain, creed does not really matter. What matters is the help, consolation, and hope for healing that can come from any corner of the world, under any name, through any medium. Pain is an equalizer of religions and healing options. Whoever is in pain knows no boundaries in their search for healing. The presence of God through family, friends, and loved ones is an answer to a prayer people do not even know how to pray. God’s answer to our prayers comes in unexpected ways. In our social life, economy, and culture, immediate relief of pain is always demanded, and it is hard to wait on God. So we must be countercultural and pray and say like the psalmist, “Stay with God! Take heart. Don’t quit. I’ll say it again: Stay with God” (Ps 27: 14 MSG). In the company of the psalmists, we will continue to wait and pray for each other until God’s healing fills the earth. Until then, we will embrace each other and all who are waiting for God, and pray for them ceaselessly. I share with you three more prayers we can pray daily without ceasing, with or without faith, for us, for our family and friends, and for the world: God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, Courage to change the things I can, And wisdom to know the difference. 19 All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well. 20 Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is now nearly over. 21 “A Future Not Our Own”: Prayers, Seeds, and Tears It helps, now and then, to step back and take a long view. The Kingdom is not only beyond our efforts, it is even beyond our vision. We accomplish in our lifetime only a tiny fraction of the magnificent enterprise that is God’s work. Nothing we do is complete, which is a way of saying that the Kingdom always lies beyond us. No statement says all that could be said. No prayer fully expresses our faith. No confession brings perfection. No pastoral visit brings wholeness. No program accomplishes the Church’s mission. No set of goals and objectives includes everything. This is what we are about. We plant the seeds that one day will grow. We water seeds already planted, knowing that they hold future promises. We lay foundations that will need further development. We provide yeast that produces effects far beyond our capabilities. We cannot do everything, and there is a sense of liberation in realizing that. This enables us to do something, and to do it very well. It may be incomplete, but it is a beginning, a step along the way, an opportunity for the Lord’s grace to enter and do the rest. We may never see the end results, but that is the difference between the master builder and the worker. We are workers, not master builders. ministers, not messiahs. We are prophets of a future that is not our own. 22 Ours is the task of ora et labora, 23 praying and working for this world and a world not our own. When we pray and work, we re-signify life, work, and a world to come. A work of hope. Quoting Nietzsche, Brazilian theologian and educator Rubem Alves reminds us that trees grow slowly. He wants to plant trees, even knowing that he will never eat of their fruits. Alves’s happiness is in knowing that he is providing for a future, where these trees will offer shade and fruits for future generations. 24 As Christians and human beings made in the image of God, we are responsible for and with this world and all its people. Ours is the work of spreading seeds of peace, health, healing and love, seeds watered by the very tears of our eyes. Praying with tears and seeds in our hands, this is our ora et labora, our prayer and our work. However, this is not enough. To the orare et laborare we must add et saltare, which is the Latin word for “to dance.” Unless we learn to dance we will not be able to pray and work. By dancing, we learn to live the fullness of life, for there is no life or religion without dancing. We would do well to heed some other words of Nietzsche, “I should only believe in a God that would know how to dance.” 25 To pray, work, and dance! And back again. To pray, work, and dance with our knees, our hands, and our hips as well. Tears added to the sweat of our bodies. Thus, prayers in the flesh as much as in our hearts and souls. Fully committed to God, to the well-being of our sisters and brothers, especially the poor, fully committed to the world and to the joy of life. Decolonial Wound Praying with the world at heart is like carrying a decolonial wound. 26 For we know the histories of stealing, death, pillaging, erasure of people and the earth. But as Mercedes Sosa sings: Tantas veces me mataron Tantas veces me morí Sin embargo estoy aquí resucitando Gracias doy a la desgracia y a la mano con puñal Porque me mató tan mal Y seguí cantando So many times they killed me So many times I died However, I am here resurrecting I give thanks to the misfortune and the hand with a dagger Because it didn’t actually kill me. We carry the wound of many deaths within us. This resurrecting in the midst of death is a way of living and a way of prayer. And a prayer that entails both death and celebration and gratitude. Our sisters’ and brothers’ prayers never disconnect suffering from celebration, life from death. Did somebody say death? We pray. Did somebody say life? We pray. Did somebody say life and death? We are grateful! We pray in the midst of words, but we also pray in silence when not to say anything is the only way to respond. Prayer with and against lack! Love against death! Re-existence against violence! Yes, we are praying! Prayer as a balm in Gilead, to heal the historical wound of colonialism, of oppression, the wound of horrors and disasters, the undeniable wound of death. Prayer in hopelessness, in powerlessness, hope in celebration. Howling, wailing... Nobody knows the troubles we’ve seen! Longing for a day of peace that I never knew, longing for what I never had, longing for a world now impossible but on its way. Stretched to my core, I pray! For my prayers are seeds! Seeds that will produce trees whose fruit my grandchildren will be able to eat. So I pray! For them to survive! For the trees to grow. Perhaps, one day, the colonial wound will disappear. The Lord’s Prayer, Revisited by Rubem Alves In hope of this healing, I offer a version of the Lord’s Prayer written by the Brazilian theologian, educator, and poet Rubem Alves. Shall we pray? Father, mother, with meek eyes I know that you are, invisibly, in all things May your name be sweet to me, The joy of my world. Bring me good things that delight you: Gardens Fountains Children Bread and wine Tender gestures Unarmed hands Bodies embracing I know that you desire to give me my deepest desire The desire that I have long forgotten But you never forget. Make manifest your desire, so that I can laugh. May your desire be made manifest in our world In the same way it pulsates within you. Grant us contentment in the joys of today Bread, water, sleep... That we may be free of anxiety. That our eyes would be as humble with others as your eyes are with us, for if we are ferocious, we will not be able to welcome your kindness. Help us to not be deceived by evil desires, and free us from that which burdens our eyes with death. Amen. 27 May God teach us how to pray with the world at heart. 1. Heschel, I Asked for Wonder, 28. 2. “Lost grace” is a term used by André Breton in Mad Love. 3. Gebara, “Liturgia e Teologia,” 60. 4. Gebara, “Liturgia e Teologia,” 59. My translation. 5. Gebara, “Liturgia e Theologia,” 62. 6. Casaldáliga and Tierra, “Missa dos Quilombos.” My translation. 7. Banzo is the feeling of something lost, left behind, a longing for something one had once but does not have anymore. The Africans, when brought to the American continent, used to mention this feeling of banzo about their homeland, people, things, life. 8. Terreiros are houses of worship in Brazil for Afro-Brazilian religious services. 9. Albores here can mean “new mornings.” 10. Palmares was a large, well-known free community in the state of Alagoas, Brazil, made up of Africans turned into slaves who rebelled against slavery and of other societal outcasts; it existed from 1605 until it was suppressed in 1694. A famous leader of Palmares was Zumbi, who was born there in 1655. When he was a child he was captured by Portuguese colonial forces. He was taught Portuguese and Latin. At the age of fifteen Zumbi rebelled, escaped, and returned to Palmares, where he became a leader of that mocambo. 11. Mocambos were villages like Palmares, formed by Africans who freed themselves from slavery. 12. Quilombos are like mocambos. 13. Boff, “Prefiro o silêncio de Buda.” My translation. 14. Rumi, “Who Says Words with My Mouth?,” 2. 15. Dĕd, I, Lalla, introduction. 16. In Portuguese, the word for anger and the word for cholera are the same. 17. Buarque and Lobo, “Salmo.” My translation. 18. Flatow, “DOJ Finds Unconstitutional Solitary Confinement.” 19. The Serenity Prayer, frequently prayed in Alcoholics Anonymous, other twelve-step groups, and other settings. Originally a longer prayer by theologian Reinhold Niebuhr. See Sifton, Serenity Prayer. 20. Julian of Norwich, Revelations. 21. Luke 24: 29 (NRSV). 22. On many internet sites, this prayer is attributed to Archbishop Óscar Romero of El Salvador, but it seems to have been composed by Bishop Ken Untener of Saginaw, Michigan, drafted for a homily given by Cardinal John Dearden of Detroit in November 1979 for a celebration of departed priests. As a reflection on the anniversary of the martyrdom of Bishop Romero, Bishop Untener included it in a passage titled “The Mystery of the Romero Prayer.” 23. Ora et Labora, “Pray and Work,” is the motto of the Benedictine monastic order. 24. Alves, “Sobre Política e Jardinagem,” 26 – 30. My translation. 25. Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra, 24. 26. The words “decolonial” and “decoloniality” will appear throughout this book. I understand much of my work as decolonial. Two of the principal decolonial thinkers write: “Decoloniality becomes a process of recognizing the colonial wounds that are historically true and still open in the everyday experience of most people on the planet.” Mignolo and Vazquez, “Decolonial AestheSis. ” 27. Alves, Perguntaram-me Se Eu Acredito Em Deus. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.