Conclusion Orienting Our Hearts to Live Better At my age, everything fits in a prayer. —Pedro Casaldáliga 236 I n a class on prayer at the Hispanic Summer Program, Ana María Rodríguez Alfonso wrote a searing story about her prayer life. Ana María called it a forgotten prayer. 237 It goes something like this: A few years ago I went through various changes in my life of faith. I have belonged to a church where I learned everything about my Christian life and the importance of prayer. Every night I spent a long time praying before going to sleep. Prayer became my refuge. My family was completely against my new faith and I had to read the Bible under the street light and forced myself to pray in complete silence. Praying in silence was not easy for me. Over the years I understood that I suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). For several years I suffered the consequences of poverty, verbal and psychological abuse, physical and sexual violence, and a profound abandonment that accompanied me until the moment I felt an indescribable closeness to the Divine. Every moment of prayer was the moment when the pain and anguish of so many years could come to the fore. Prayer was my safe place, a place where no one could harm me. When I was praying, the Divine was there, embracing all the broken pieces of my humanity like a mother embraces her child. I felt protected by a Divine shield. As the psalmist said, I was protected inside a mighty tower. I felt so comfortable that I could cry and express everything I felt inside and at the end, I could get up with my spirit full again and my afflictions seemed to be gone. This amazing experience lasted a couple of years until my family forbade me to go back to church. It was only many years later that I return to a new church. But in this new church, I learned that everything I had experienced with God before was wrong. The teachings I received went so deep inside of me that I could not pray anymore. I became afraid, since I thought I had done everything wrong. My safe place was gone. My life fell apart so quickly that I didn’t have a floor to fall on. My cry now was alone, without the Divine shield, without anyone. I left that church, but I forgot to pray. For years I did not want to pray. Lately, I started to reconcile myself with prayer. Slowly, I started praying again, here and there. I have discovered that prayer for me was as fundamental as breathing. I have been rebuilding my safe place again, where I join God in new warm and loving embraces. This story moved me deeply and made me think that prayer is like a nest we build little by little, with whatever materials we can find to give ourselves protection. Once we are safe enough, we need to take flight and venture into other skies. For no nest will last for one’s entire life. Ana María built a nest and lost it. She had to build it again. To build a prayer nest one needs time, patience, and a lot of work. And then there are rest, alertness, care, pause, and other forms of life being built. Over time, though, our life changes and the nest doesn’t function anymore. For a nest only serves for a season. Then off we go. We learn with Ultima, the grandmother of Antonio, a little boy learning with her about life and the power of the earth in the novel of Rudolfo A. Anaya, Bless Me, Ultima, that change is part of our strength: “You are growing, and growth is change. Accept the change, make it a part of your strength.” 238 We start orienting our hearts by knowing that change and transformation are a constant part of life. And this constant work of change is the work of building the nest, resting, and flying again. Knowing ourselves and the ways of our mutual life, moving around paradoxes, being cared for and taking care, learning to live in abandonment and to live a life of embraces, going from and through the end of times and into the beginning of a new world after the end of the world. The work of prayer is a work of our archives, the depth of ourselves, the depth of histories, the depth of wisdom, and the depth of the earth. Alexis Pauline Gumbs tells us in After the End of the World about her own archives: “the archive of dirt: what we did; the archive of sky: what we become; the archive of fire: rate of change and the archive of ocean: origin.” 239 In naming these archives, Gumbs is decolonizing herself; she is moving deeply into territories hidden, taken away, destroyed by forces of death. By digging into our personal and collective archives, we find our collective history, destiny, and freedom. That is the orientation of our hearts. Prayer is an inner practice that leads us to conversion and interior transformation. Prayer is also an outer practice that can change the world. Inside and outside are constantly being reshaped together for life to be healed, transformed, challenged, expanded—until we finally become free with the world. If you have come this far in the book, I hope you have wrestled with some of the issues raised here and found some materials to build your own nest, knowing that your nest—with your life and the life of your community—is at stake, and thus the lives of all the living creatures, the rocks, and the whole world. If the prayer materials offered here are too much for you at this time, set them aside. Use only what you think you can use for your nest, for what is coming to you now. Perhaps this book will speak to you more at a later time. Orient yourself according to your own needs. Pray, desire, dream, excavate, touch the ground; for these movements of the heart, body, and soul are networks of solidarity and life together. Pray as an exercise of your entire being with the earth. Pray not necessarily knowing everything. Prayer grants us a knowledge of God that is only found in the unknown. A life of prayer is not one that keeps building brick upon brick on the edifice of belief but rather, an itinerary that pays attention to where we have been, where we live, where we are heading, and to all the forms of life and death surrounding us. Prayer, as we have seen, is ora et labora, prayer (which also includes rest) and work amidst the piling up of the debris of our world, carrying the grief of so many human deaths, animal extinctions, and unbearable Earth destruction. In these moments, Jesus will pray for us until we are able to pray again. Then, when we are ready again, we pick up the prayer and start all over again. Like the endless work of Saint Francis physically repairing the structure of the San Damiano church in Italy. Like the endless work of Sisyphus pushing the boulder up the mountain; in a new perspective on the myth, it is also a work of love. One day, the church will be ready, and we will rejoice! One day, the boulder will stay put, the curse will be undone, the boulder will dissipate—or the mountainous terrain will level out. I leave you with a prayer by the poet Paul Celan, the last line of his poem “Vast, Glowing Vault”: The world is gone, I must carry you. 240 Shall we pray? 236. Casaldáliga, “Na minha idade, tudo cabe em uma oração.” 237. Story used with permission of Ana María Rodríguez Alfonso, who also asked that her real name be kept. I want to say a word of gratitude to Ana María but also to all of my incredible students who were in the class “Praying in Times of COVID- 19 and Other Disasters” in the 2020 Hispanic Summer Program. They were the first to read the first draft of this book: Maria Isabel Salazar, Mark Anthony Hernández, Adriana Rivera, Martin Tapia, Jess Navarette, Sally Marie Foster, Diana Rosa Ramos Garcia, Yadira Martinez, Omar Isaac Ortiz, and Jonathan Paredes. My gratitude to you all! 238. Anaya, Bless Me, Ultima, 245. 239. Gumbs, After the End of the World. These words are some of the chapter titles in her magnificent book. 240. Celan, “Die Welt ist fort, ich muß dich tragen,” in Derrida, Sovereignties in Question, 158. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.