11 Praying with a Lost Heart A Decolonial Prayer Dear God, G*, Goddess Querida/o/x Deus/Deusa, Estimadx Dios, I call on you not knowing how to call you. I don’t know in the grips of what principality I am when I say your name. When I pronounce your name, am I under the wings of your love or the paws of something evil? Who am I speaking with when I address you as my God? And hear, O God, I mean not you but those who are actually with me when I utter your name. Whose project am I a part of when I offer myself to you? How can I escape the spirit of the world, especially a nationalistic world, when I speak to you? How can I make the you I say not become my property or part of my compulsions and consumptions? How do I say your name by losing myself in the fullness of my own dis-appropriation? 192 I would rather start my prayer by speaking somebody else’s words, appropriating the voice of a precious Vietnamese sister and the words with which she (does not) pray(s): Somewhere in the process the flowers wither and the whole world smells of open wounds. The peculiar odor of fire powder, dust and dirt, concrete and steel; the very odor of blood, carbolic acid, decaying insides and burnt carnality has been trapped for some time in the air, but only the child in me—a child of the war—notices it. The wounded adult-me weeps at the sight of wreckage, loudly deplores the tragedies, vocally condemns the abuses, then visually gets inoculated with the constant replay on screen of serialized destruction. And, when the shock has faded, finds it quasi natural to move about band-aided with an invisible muffler. The dis-ease goes on unacknowledged. The toxic spill effect, felt but largely unseen, is slowly laying waste in the overexposed cities—these immense man-made wildernesses where its inhabitants caught in between walls of metal, zinc or concrete have little access to the light innerscape of blood flowers. Again, the heart meanders for no one knows why. Sudan, Tiber, Iraq, Afghanistan, Palestine, Rwanda, Congo, Burma, and... and... and, with the recurring specters of Bosnia, Kosovo, South Africa, Cambodia, Vietnam. What is it that makes both talks and silences stained with shame? Everyone readily comes up with an answer and everyone is eager to fill in the blanks. But once raised, the question never fails to fold back, returning to just where one thinks one last knows. Rising like the murmurs of an underground river, it persists in infinite whisperings, striking randomly when it is least expected. Could it be the sound? The places in sight? The lie, the fear, the excess, or, that shadow of a frail body in flight? Sometimes the mind freezes and the heart goes on fasting: name, nation, identity, citizenship disappear. Once I was a human. 193 My sister helps me name my inability to speak after seeing so many human cruelties and unnamable disasters. For when I present myself to you in prayer, I am ashamed of what we have become, a form of human species that has been able to build wonderful things but in this process of creation has destroyed everything. I am now speaking to you from the end of what we call life, at the edge of our common living, at the dusk of our civilizations. I come to you not knowing how to answer you in the places where my brothers and sisters are. Do you see that miserable child drinking dirty water from the city grounds? That is where my sisters and brothers are, O God. My problem in praying to you is that I don’t know how to tell you why they are there, with their frail bodies, at the end of their ability to hold on. So I call your name from an “offshore call center,” a center outside of the real centers of life, under those who own these centers and crush us. I call you from a non-place, a stance of vulnerability, where my voice is blurred with the voices of millions of people whose death is necessary so others can live. I call from a non-place where human beings are called “human resources.” I am sorry: in these places people speak with accents. I pray that you understand my prayer even if I don’t understand myself. I am calling on you from one of the non-places that function as subsidiaries of the modern thinking of Europe, the worldview of the United States, and the growing control by China. From a temporary non-place where my voice sounds nasal, underdeveloped, unfinished, using very slow speed internet. It’s not drugs, God. And yet, it is hard not to live under any kind of drugs, prescribed or not, to keep up with our times. O God, how you have changed through the years! How did you make it here? I remember when, in my naiveté, I thought the objectivity of my thinking was my salvation. I could reach the skies of proper academic work and be counted among the intellectuals! That eventually got me a very nice job, which I still have. But now, I realize, these forms of objectivity were another trap of the profit motive orienting all forms of education these days. May I still believe that I have some agency in this? Do my own people have agency here? My delusional and triumphalist academic work is what preserves me. Have I become trapped in the rationalization of the European enlightenment that tells me, “Either Greek-Western thinking or barbarism!”? I am holding myself back from telling you about all of the deaths and oppression that are stored in my visual memory, but I don’t want to bother you with the obvious. I confess that I can only pray like Walter Benjamin, who saw the angel of history, looking back and seeing all the debris of tragedies piling up in human history, death and graves and demolitions. All that the angel of history tells us is that more afflictions are coming—the past clearly shows it. Instead of finding something new, something that will help us re-create the world accordingly, we are going to encounter again the historical demons we did not face in the past. God of all disasters, how do we learn to move towards the future without assurances of transformation, and with the certainty that unfathomable disasters are coming our way? Can your presence enable us to travel within dangerous memories of the past so that our future can be more than the self-enclosed destinies of our doomed rhetoric of progress and naïve hope? From this call center, serving the big centers of theology, I pray that I see and feel the angelus novus alive in me, doing me every morning and folding its wings every night if possible, illuminating both our past and future, as to reorder our present in new worlds of possibilities for this earth, for all of us. From this call center I cry to you, O God. I pray that I can see beyond the pillage of bodies everywhere; I pray that I can listen to sounds beyond the sounds of bullets and of deathly silence; I pray that I can smell the scent of flowers and the forests beyond the strong acid, dry smell of the earth burning for our consumption; I pray that I can drink and swim in the waters of rivers and the sea while we still have water to drink and ocean life is still there; I pray that I can hear somebody else pray to you, other than you, not You; I pray that I can touch the bodies of my grandchildren with the lightness of an open, viable future; I pray that I can taste the salty waters of my tears turning into honeydew in the mouth of all those who will come after me. But God, I confess it is so hard. Again, I call your name from the ass-holes of the Americas, the shitty places to which nobody pays attention, the call centers of broken-bodied, broken-hearted, and broken-spirited people. Those who are the damned, doubly disfigured people, those who try to self-renovate and self-disguise through resistance and assimilation so as to keep going with their lives hanging by a thread. 194 Disfiguring and being disfigured, time and again, Indigenous, Blacks, women, children, queer people, Palestinians, poor people. They are mine and I am theirs, even when the very us embedded in theirs is so difficult to describe, even when we are pitted against each other for the sake of sacred wars, capitalist consumerism, and political conquest. May I never forget the only thing I may know: we share the same humus/humanness, the same stardust that composes us, the same glory, the same earth, the same wind, the same wonder. I call you from the centers of power about the offshore center calls, to talk to you about decolonialidad. That word is bullshit as is everything else, but perhaps it is a necessary one, which contains the hopes of disentangling our vocabulary, our prayer grammar, our imperial forms of knowledge and other forms of knowing, so that we can birth old and new ways of living and being and praying. From these call centers I call on you, O God! They are places of faith that render your name so frail. When we speak your name from these places we are thrown into ambiguities. And for both yes and no and maybe, I pray to you, O God, O my soul, you who are the source of creativity, renewal, feistiness, and fetishism. As I pray, I name you, my God, but a God only conceived in terms of a collectivity, as long as collectivity means deliverance and liberation. A God so much mine that you can only belong to others. Like your/my/our people, I can only pray to you in the plural, the plural of myself in them, and their polydoxy in me. For I can only count myself in the many, possessed that I am by the many winds of your Spirit, by the many living and nonliving creatures that I am woven with, and braided through the ancestries of the world and all the forms of lives of the earth. It is under this consciousness of this maddening “garment of mutuality” that I keep myself sane—my madness being one that can only be tamed by the plurality of people and the many spirits in me. So I pray, O God, that no one ever casts away all the people who live in me. Without them I am silenced, I am extinguished. These call centers are from the cú do mundo, which is filled with discardable people, those whose skin cannot bear worth, whose souls have no value, those who have been vanished from the centers of power, those displaced and kept at a distance from the actual places where the services take place, those who now live in the shadows of our illuminated misery. These call centers are also sites where the earth calls your name groaning in pain. Can you hear them? Can you see the recent new turnings of the world, O God of the disenfranchised? A new blood-shed turn that unites nationalism, militarism, right-wing religion, fascism, extractivism, and patriarchy is threatening to endanger us even more. They are pressing into the ongoing fragility of our systems of self-sustenance: depression, isolation, fears, violence, alienation, addiction, panic, all countless forms of instability. One of the formal expressions of this conservatism, fascist white supremacy, capitalism, and right-wing religion is the work of political theorist Yoram Hazony, who has proclaimed the new forms of “national community” and identities in which he refreshes the old moral loyalty to nation, family, and property into more expanded ways of gluing the constitution of a nation to the structures of the self. 195 O God, I hear the same things from your professed servant, the neofascist president of Brazil, Jair Messias Bolsonaro, who wants the patriarchal ruling elites to continue to sustain the upper hand over minorities who need to assimilate or be excluded. The ruling “nations” are the ones who set aside and control the offshore centers of power and exploitation. They are scavengers of natural and human resources, depleting their means until exhaustion and then throwing them away. They are but patriarchal fascist movements after the use of law for their own fulfillment and the destruction of the women and children. O God, have you created us wired to capitalism so we can only understand and live in consumeristic ways? Is our brain malleable so we can adapt to our own destruction? Or is it the global capitalism that shapes our brain in ways that we cannot escape? Is the plasticity of our brain a form of adaptation to the systems or is it flexibility that makes us submit to forms of power? 196 I pray that our prayer practices can help us live in the Spirit of plasticity so we can engage situations by saying NO to forms of capitalism that destroy or prevent life in all forms. But God of all and no disciplines, my vocation is also my malady. My professional advancement depends on parochialism and self-regard. The weakness being the impossibility to have a conversation outside of the field of liturgy where other forms of knowledge must always turn back to the God-given liturgical knowledges, assurances, and assessments. Prayers in books and altars away from the people. Our universal prayers praise you, but do nothing for the real situations of real people. I wonder about our speaking out of both sides of our mouths when we say our prayers: on one side we say our litany of confessions about the things we do and should not do, but on the other side of our lips we silence the litanies of injustices churches keep speaking because of neoliberal capitalism. Forgive me, God, for my wariness, but it is becoming increasingly more difficult to defend you. Or to defend you as I defend myself? Or to indict you as I also indict my own field? I don’t know so I come to you. God of all the answers, help me here with some questions I have. Are you on the side of the good guys or the bad guys? My conundrum is this: I teach liturgy, and I am supposed to teach the history, acts, gestures, thoughts, and modes of being a Christian by way of the doings of the liturgy, something fundamental in every religion. I wonder whether what I am teaching is nothing more than a nuanced source of reinforced coloniality, just another tool in the master’s toolbox. 197 Am I fair to you when I say that a lot of the history of the church is filled with the smell of putrefied bodies killed and destroyed by your church in your name? Am I too harsh if I say that the church in Latin America was mostly a racist, capitalist, white supremacist catalyst for greed, arrogance, and defilement, or that the white Christian churches in the US are really nothing but a tale of the slavocrat, patriarchal, capitalistic elite? I confess, for you already know it, my questions are forms of answers which are so difficult to move away from without moving away from You, the you I thought was always so near. If I am not making you mad or bothering you too much, I also want to press a little more and ask about worship books. Can we still use them? People say that our prayer books have the wisdom of the past and that they can give us a trajectory of your movements in history. They say it is wonderful to continue to pray the same prayers your people have prayed for ages. They say these books come close to what the early church did. But let me confess this to you, O God from whom nothing is hidden. I have my suspicions. That those books only carry the wisdom of some people especially from the Norte, and we are supposed to repeat them like parrots as the universal Christian religion. And worse: that we can only be authentic, valid Christians, if we can recite the books and do exactly what the books tell us to do. Thus, the formula of my teaching, in order to have my students pass the exams of their churches, is “Be the best parrots you can be; if you can believe in it, even better!” When I teach, I must acquire enough knowledge so I can continue speaking in your hallowed name. With all of that, I wonder, am I confessing the unholy expectation of the church, the necessary duplicity of my students’ religious tasks or my own complicity and lack of courage? For all of that I beg for forgiveness. Can the denominational books of prayers offer anything good? Or are they pretty much psychological ways of organizing and comforting the souls of bodies drenched in capitalism? Are they prayers that do not do much beyond smoothing the path of class struggle? On the other hand, there are these new “cool” churches that avoid the liturgical books and are bound to the efficacy of their faith, making prayers an instrumentalization of the capitalistic society as they rush to become a sub-product of the neoliberal economic environment of our time. They pray mighty prayers, extemporaneously, and promise promises to enhance the empire of the individual, while destroying the ecosystems and basic commonalities. They are very different in their collective and individual approach to you and to life, but they are exactly the same in their leanings towards capitalism. I wonder: Where is the best place to pray to you? In churches where people bow down to patriarchal priests with pointy hats, in liberal Protestant churches that keep the same patriarchal structures, or in new churches with horrendous “cool” liturgies and racist pastors? How do we Christians unlearn the prayer of greed and undo the desire for social ascension? How do we foster a society that leads us not into the temptation of full monetary indebtedness and emptiness? I wonder: When did the Christian faith become a high commodity, one shaped by colonialism, and fully lived in the gospel proclaimed by suburban churches and lower-class theologies of prosperity? When was it that we got so detached from the earth and incarnated a new trinity described by Eduardo Viveiros de Castro as “State the Father, Market the Son, and Reason/Science the Holy Spirit”? 198 This trinitarian structure holds together the totality of the self that owns everything. As my friend Ken Sawyer, with whom I pray all the time, rightly said, “Self the Father, Self the Son, and Self the Holy Spirit.” 199 The offshore prayer call places I am imagining calling to you from are filled with people whose lives are meaningless to many Self-trinitarian Christians whose only concern is to properly own their own lives. I once heard that the devil is not your opposite, O God, but your twisted self, the one who sneaks in and does the evil work in us without our perceiving its presence. I wonder why we were never clever enough to see the work of the devil turning Christianity into a major driving force of colonialism and capitalism, with Protestantism in a major alliance with the Market. Why, since the time of Jesus, have very few Christians been angry with the money-changers of our day, the merchants and the business people? I assume that you might still be angry at these people, but what do you do when they own the church? Are you still part of this business-entrepreneurial organization called church? Or have you been pushed out by your business partners, downsized or outsourced, no longer essential to the business model? Aren’t you frustrated that your announced kin(g)dom of God has become this institution we call church? But surely there are some parts of this church that look like you: it was because of the church that I got where I am now, so I have seen real love happening. Professor James Cone once told me over lunch that the church is a very small thing everywhere. From his experience with the institutional church in the US, he told me, “It is very hard to find the church, but it exists!” You know too well, God, that since Constantine we have sold our soul to the powers that be. We have swum in the fullness of patriarchy and we still do. We became an empire and we continue to be. Your name has been spoken mostly in vain since that time with exceptions when your name truly matters for “the least of these.” And then, O God, since the Reformation, Christianity has been fundamental to the very structure of expansion through colonization. Christianity became a modern Western enterprise, an apparatus for the conquering machine of the West. During colonization, patriarchy kissed whiteness, fucked non-European people, and gave birth to colonialism and all its racist murderous siblings. God have mercy on us, for the (we the) devil won this battle! Since the Reformation we have learned to read the Bible differently. And we learned from our Reformed leaders that a little bit of usury was not that bad, that crushing peasants was necessary in order to obey the Princes and continue to be the church. Under your banner, the church was sanctified with power and money and used the people as resources for its wealth. By allying the Bible with the middle classes, it served the elite. The Reformation churches lost sight of the poor and forgot about your plans of justice and preference for the poor. We Christians mirrored the Hebrew covenant between you and Abraham with a covenantal love with conquering Emperors! The Protestant churches became like the Catholics they had rebuked. With the holy Crusades, we destroyed every enemy on the way, especially the Jews, who—we believed—had clearly betrayed us! The new covenant expanded, and Protestant churches jumped on the wave of capitalism, helping the system to be organized, appeased, controlled and appreciated. Churches boomed everywhere, missions went overseas, colonization took over the world, and Christian white supremacy flourished! It made sense to say, “God is good all the time!” Please receive my litany of laments, O God. I lament that Calvin was in favor of a little usury. I lament that Luther supported the crushing of the peasants and bashed the Jews. I lament that Christians provided capitalism with great theological thinking and normalized capitalism’s actions. I lament that early capitalism borrowed the doctrine of Providence and the invisible hand of God to organize the understanding of the Market 200 that controlled everything. I lament that Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations 201 used the notion of your invisible hand as the invisible hand that organizes and controls the market. I lament that the capitalist system learned to work on a profoundly faulty aspect of the human soul. I lament that what was supposed to be the means of grace and love turned into the crushing of sinners, including the Jews and peasants in Europe. I lament that the doctrine of the total corruption or depravity helped to establish rules of monetary transactions. I lament the perverse thinking of Christians who saw us in such horrendous ways, even though we are both homo demens (delusional beings) and homo ludens (playful beings). I lament the ways in which the economic imagination used the delusional part of ourselves and the use of sin, moral limitation, and human brokenness as the conditions for capitalism to build its whole ground where the renting system lends money to people knowing that many of them will never be able to repay it. I lament that the economic covenant is now made in the hope of profit and destruction. I lament that human “sin” became the place where economic greed meets human limitations, the crux of our own self-destruction, where human perversion becomes the axis that organizes the ways we live. I lament that many of us have lost our sense of awareness and enlightenment and are turning our species against its own self. I lament that the Reformation inaugurated a covenant between the Christian faith and the new emerging market and its political powers. This covenant lasted for a long time. I lament that the construction of the liberal market coincided with the growth of Protestant churches. These churches never condemned the economic market, but instead, replicated the model of the market into their own structures. I lament that the unquenchable desire of God became the ceaseless desire of desiring desire for things. I lament that even to this day, Protestant churches mirror the market: a vast majority of small and medium churches are disappearing and a few big, rich churches are thriving; a few pastors are paid like CEOs, while the majority of pastors are struggling to make ends meet; the size of endowments is more important than the size of student debt; rich donors are honored more than people working in places being dismantled by state abandonment and violence. As I lament, we don’t deny, O God, that there has always been a faithful relationship between the Christian faith and the middle and upper classes in the United States, but we can no longer deny that the poor have been completely silenced and excluded from public conversation. But God, everything comes to an end, and this very satisfactory covenant didn’t last. With the structure of the market going from liberal to neoliberal, capitalism broke its covenant with the Protestant and Catholic churches and affiliated itself with neo-Pentecostal churches. We never thought that capitalism would break this sacred covenant, but it did. Now many Christian churches, seminaries, and other institutions are at a loss because they don’t know how to survive. We have learned to trust wholeheartedly in the Market and not in you, and now our faith keeps fluctuating with the market. Any Christian institution in the First World today depends fundamentally on budget, not necessarily on faith. There is no Christianity without budgets. As we have had plenty of opportunities to see in history, O God, capitalism as an autophagic system orients and adapts itself according to the most pressing opportunities. Once capitalism saw it didn’t need the official church anymore, that they didn’t have the importance in the culture that Christianity and Christians used to have, it started calling individual pastors to do the dirty job of teaching people to bow down to God by way of aligning themselves with corrupt systems with the promise that, if they teach their people that everything is only a matter of inner faith and that whatever they desire can be satisfied, they would be rewarded. In liberal capitalism, pastors are running out of jobs and churches closing, while denominations are still carrying loads of old money. Surely, they are still a part of the system and it doesn’t seem they will break with it. Liberal capitalism fosters an alliance between liberal theologies and Protestant churches. The new theological need of the neoliberal market is to organize itself around other forms of theology and the Prosperity Gospel, where You are the richest king ever. It seems to be a great deal. Besides the eternal rehashing of old toothless liberal theologies, the neoliberal economic system matches new Prosperity Gospel churches in powerful ways. Among the chief differences, Prosperity Gospel churches will bring in the money and make their own budget with the enrichment of pastors while Protestant church pastors will have a specific salary, cash flow, and budget to keep and possibly an endowment to secure. While Protestant churches do not need to talk about desires because its members have the basics for life: house, car, school for their children, and health care, Prosperity Gospel churches must speak of desires and consumerism openly, aiming at going up in the social chain and, depending on people’s social location, acquiring a first or second or third car. While Protestant churches have members and have to keep up old buildings, Prosperity Gospel churches don’t have members and are always building newer and bigger buildings, which are signs of their faith to God. The victims of the historical forms of capitalism and the current neoliberal system who are now in offshore praying places have to cope with the precarization of their own lives, the necro-politics of nation-states, the increasing vulnerability of their lives, and a faith that engulfs them even back into this system of domination. O God, we could go on, but you know what happened to us! The cross of Jesus Christ was turned from a symbol of violence and humiliation into candies—strawberry lollipops sold in Christian stores, attesting to the lucrative financial marketing potential for US Christians. In a nutshell, we Christians were able to entangle faith, money, whiteness, patriarchy, heterosexism, and classism, and intertwine it all in many forms of perpetual racism. Nonetheless, the financial gain was quite good. We were able to build religious empires made of money where Jesus Christ is used as its major patron. Just in the US, religion is worth $ 1. 2 trillion a year. 202 A triumph for sure! I am just not sure if the triumph is yours, O God, or whether it is ours and/or the Devil’s. This is the face of the Christian gospel and I wonder how you feel about it. That is why, God of the poor, my mind and my heart wonder about those Christians who remain faithful, those of whom James Cone said are the real church of Jesus Christ, those who persist and hold on to the prophetic voice of Jesus and continue to resist oppression and death here and there, the ones who carry a faith that is fully lived in precarious places around the globe, in poverty-stricken situations, in offshore call centers where people keep on calling your name. Now, O God, my voice trembles and drifts away, my self is divided and broken, not knowing how to organize myself in the face of so many conflicts and contradictions. But if you, O God, stay with me and have mercy on me and the changes of the tonalities of my voice, I will say this to you as if, and only as if, I am telling it to the world. There is coloniality everywhere in my faith. How do I give an account of the “coloniality of power” 203 through the intricacies of many grammars of faith and forms of living faithfully, O God? How does Christian religious formation through songs, prayers, sermons, worship spaces, stories, and theologies hold onto cosmologies and forms of living that can both liberate and oppress people? I wonder about how every one of my senses, filled with coloniality, prevents me from fully saying your name. Whose name am I saying when I say your name? Am I saying the name of the one who destroyed my people and stole their land? Are you, O God, really good all the time? In addition to inhabiting my vocabulary and my grammar, coloniality holds sway even over my sense of home. Where do I belong? How can I be less divided while living in such radically different worlds within the Americas? Surely I need to learn to be less Brazilian in the US and less of the US in Brazil. “Why do you do that?” is a constant question I have to answer, and I always freeze when this angry question is thrown at me, in both interpersonal and institutional cases, often with threats to me of proper consequences for my behavior. My immigrant experiences are filled with contradictions. When I think “correctly,” I make my way around here, even as I am reminded that I am from somewhere else. When I go to Brazil, my own people remind me that I haven’t been there for a while and I now belong elsewhere. Then I remember a reflection by our brother Luis N. Rivera-Pagán and add it to my prayer: Diaspora entails dislocation, displacement, but also a painful and complex process of forging new strategies to articulate cultural differences and identifications. In the Western cosmopolis, with its heterogeneous and frequently conflicting ethnocultural minorities that belie the mythical e pluribus unum, the émigré exists in ambivalent tension. 204 God, my prayer doesn’t have a ground. My dislocation is lodged in my soul and manifests itself in the awkward movements of my body and the overshowing of my emotions. Dislodged from a mythical place of fullness, my dislocation cannot be compared to the displacement of those who are truly scattered around the world today: those displaced by war, running away from threats, living in refugee camps, trying to hang in there with those who pray in the misplaced, forgotten offshore call centers of our world. Where are you for these people, my God of love? These offshore call centers are purposefully created in order to be hidden and forgotten. The call centers offer artificial care to the affluent within the sterile world of finances and extort every single penny from middle-class people who want to survive or, better, to get the deals that will help them climb the social ladder. 205 These offshore call centers are also accompanied by porous borders and are places of heavy militarization, turning immigrants into “illegal,” “sick,” and “dangerous” “terrorists.” God, did you see the caravans of migrants from Central America? Where do they belong? Their countries are filled with violence and when they come to the US, mothers, tíos, and niños are threatened with military weapons. O God, where do immigrants belong? Do they belong to you? If “belong” means “to be with,” as a character in Coetzee’s Slow Man observes, immigrants do not belong anywhere because the “I” of the immigrant is always detached from the “we”: “I am not the we of anyone.” 206 As we move around, sometimes we find the we of our I. It happened to me when I was saved by a friend who said that we belong to the shalom of God. Whatever that means, it provided me with an oikos, a home, a household, a place. It also happened when I found the nest of my wife and children. And it happens in my daily walk, with what I learned from the Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh, who invites to pray with each step: I have arrived. I am home. In the here. In the now. I am solid. I am free. In the ultimate I dwell. 207 All of these welcoming occasions happened to me because I was given an official document. I am legal, God of all documents. Because I am a man, because I pass as a white guy, and mostly for not speaking in some places, I was accepted as a citizen. And now I wonder: How do I learn to belong to God’s shalom in the midst of my undocumented people? How do I get rid of the fear that my adoptive children will be ashamed of my broken English and thick accent, or that I might eventually embarrass them just for being brown in the US? How can I learn to always arrive at each step without confusion and separation? Or without speaking your name in vain? O God, I need your help, for I still feel that coloniality is at the heart of my prayer. Just as it owns my vocabulary, coloniality defines how I pray and behave, controlling my knees and my neck, its dirty hands on my jugular in case I move too much. Where do I go to find you, my God? Prayer books are both a source of peace and—mostly—utter foreignness. The hymn that I learned in my first years at my family’s Presbyterian church and that I still sing gives me peace through its foreign ways. The author was a British man named Sabine Baring-Gould and the title of the hymn is “Now the Day is Over.” 208 The hymn says so much to me, is so much a part of me, is so much a radical otherness in me, through such an unspoken acculturation/assimilation/liberation. If, as Augustine has taught us, singing is praying twice, does that mean that when I am singing my colonizer’s song I am being doubly colonized? Doubly defaced? Doubly deceived? Does that mean that the healing power of this song in my heart and the sense of protection I always felt when I sang it were doubly wrong? Was it improper for me to sing it when Christianity was the language of those who taught me more than songs and prayers but morals and ways of living, even as they stole everything from my people? How can I even say that, when the church gave me everything I have and took me away from poverty? Should I get rid of these hymns and find a new song? What is in fact my own song? If this hymn is not mine, what song is? What makes something mine and what makes something a[n] [mis]appropriation? How much is “colonial Latino Christendom” 209 the holder of power elsewhere? How do we fight this? How do I learn what is mere parroting of somebody else’s power and create and generate narratives of liberation and transformation for my own people, even if the narrative comes from outside and it is mixed with the narratives of my own people? What are we to do with worship books and Indigenous practices? Can I call Bob Marley’s “Redemption Song” my theme song when I am not Jamaican or Rastafarian? Help us, O God, to understand that there is no pure culture or essentialized race: help us to understand that isolation of groups from each other and notions of race without expansive mutualities and diverse bodies are exactly what kills us. May Bob Marley become my elder and my guide so I can sing his song. As I move towards finishing this prayer, I must say that in spite of speaking too much here, I have been tempted to go into aphasia. Especially when I hear about the endless destruction of Black people, Indigenous people, the poor, and the earth. Especially when I think that the gospel of Jesus is about love, no harm, caring, and honor. But love is nowhere to be found. Then “love” becomes the code for domination, for nationalism, for oppression. I love you so much that I must turn you into something like me, or else kill you for the sake of the world. Love decoded is read “coloniality.” So much love in our world is in service to false gods! Unless love is embodied in material gestures of transformation and acts of liberation, we are only using it for dominance. Unless love is the awareness of the killing of people and the destruction of the earth, love is nothing more than a tool in the master’s tool box. As our brother Ignacio Ellacuría so vividly said, “Those who make themselves deaf and blind, because they think that [the open wound of injustice and suffering] is not a religious problem, these are the lukewarm that God, disgusted, has already vomited out of his mouth.” 210 Everything is stolen and appropriated by this colonial love. Even our dreams are colonized, O God. Our unconscious has been taken over by centuries of oppression, and the loss of our dreams is tantamount to our current natural and social disaster. The extent of our disaster is the size of the destruction of the earth. We cannot think or feel anything else than our own desires and entitlement. We cannot hear the earth groaning. We cannot adjust our lives to the limits and pace of the earth. We cannot let the earth orient our rhythms. Development and progress are never to be challenged. Even our sense of humanity is now deeply attached to our ability to develop and progress. If we do not always produce something that results in progress or efficiency, we are not living up to our full potential. The result is that we become more detached from the earth, eating poisonous food and becoming sick, anxious, and depressed. God, in these times of increasing instability and insecurity, we cannot root our spirituality in you if your name entails a separation between heaven and Earth, a dualism between transcendence and immanence. We must start listening to the voices of Earth by listening to those who listen to the earth. Sylvia Marcos tells us of a movement of Mesoamerican women presenting a mutuality of relations, complementarities, and intersectionalities as fundamental to Indigenous forms of spiritualities. She writes, As Comandanta Esther insisted in her address to the Mexican Congress, complementarity embraces everything in nature. She explained that earth is life, is nature, and we are all part of it. This simple phrase expresses the interconnectedness of all beings in the Mesoamerican cosmos. Beings are not separable from one another. This principle engenders a very particular form of human collectivity with little tendency to individuation. This sense of connectedness has been found consistently within contemporary indigenous medical systems and also in the first historical primary sources. The “I” cannot be abstracted from its surroundings. There is a permanent transit between the inside and the outside.... The international indigenous movements... acknowledge the damage that diverse colonialisms have done to their worldviews and have begun to echo one another concerning the value of recovering their own spiritualities and cosmologies. 211 How can we make the I become a we, O God? Our we is much too entranced by our own selves and our own noises. We do not listen to the birds, we cannot hear the water, we do not pause to hear the sounds of the earth. The coloniality of white academic scholarship has deemed thinking and breathing with the earth a weaker form of scholarship. God of our lives, help us, the we, perform other than our known forms of prayers. Prayers and performances that haunt the site of the oppressor. May these offshore call centers be a double sign of vengeance: vengeance by the poor, who will sooner or later invade the boundaries of gentrified white supremacist zip codes; vengeance by the earth, which will get rid of us at the right time. Surely these call centers will be changed so as to pray and to pronounce your name. The faithful ones from everywhere among the poor will remind us of the possibility of the gospel of Jesus Christ! I feel the Spirit nudging me for a good word here before I end my prayer. I am reminded of Howard Thurman’s wisdom: “Don’t ask yourself what the world needs. Ask yourself what makes you come alive and then go do that. Because what the world needs is people who have come alive.” 212 I am also reminded of the wisdom that admonishes us to plant trees we will never see but under whose shade our grandchildren will rest. May this prayer, O God, help us engage with the Memory of Fire as remembered by our brother Eduardo Galeano, who prayed: “I believe in memory not as a place of arrival, but as point of departure—a catapult throwing you into present times, allowing you to imagine the future instead of accepting it.” 213 I am sorry I spoke so much. Forgive me, O God, for being so diffuse, for not addressing just one thing wholeheartedly, for letting my mind follow the wanderings of my heart, for the heaviness of my inconsistencies. If I pray, it is because I hope this prayer can be received by you and encompassed within the multitude of your mercy. Merciful One, I beg for mercy! I pray trusting the words of Scripture: Likewise the Spirit helps us in our weakness; for we do not know how to pray as we ought, but that very Spirit intercedes with sighs too deep for words. And God, who searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God. (Rom 8: 26 – 27 NRSV) In the name of the we -refugee-undocumented-immigrant-lynched Jesus Christ, whose life was killed by state-sanctified violence for all of the call centers of this world, I pray. 192. “A veces le llamo S/N (sin nombre), a veces dios-cómplice, a veces nada. Como a menudo lo he explicado, pienso que cada cual tiene derecho a inventar su propio dios y a diseñar su propia gnosis.” Pániker, Adiós a casi todo, locs. 32 – 34, Kindle. 193. Minh-ha, Lovecidal, 1, italics original. 194. Chow, Not like a Native Speaker, 8. 195. Hazony is a proponent of a form of free state where “a majority nation whose cultural dominance is plain and unquestioned, and against which resistance appears to be futile. Such a majority nation is strong enough not to fear challenges from national minorities, and so is able to grant them rights and liberties without damaging the internal integrity of the state. For the most part, they therefore assimilate themselves into the system of expectations established by the constitutional and religious culture of the majority nation, learning its language and resorting to violence only on rare occasions.” Hazony, Virtue of Nationalism, 165. 196. Malabou, What Should We Do with Our Brain? 197. Lorde, The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House. 198. Viveiros de Castro, “A revolução faz o bom tempo.” 199. Ken Sawyer, Professor of Church History, in reading and praying this text with me. 200. Throughout this chapter and the book, I use the notion of the financialized market in two ways: Market (capitalized) as almost a divine institution, and market (lowercase) as a human creation that can be dismantled. 201. Smith, Wealth of Nations. 202. “U.S. Religion Is Worth $ 1. 2 T/Year.” 203. Quijano, “Coloniality of Power.” 204. Rivera-Pagán, “Towards a Decolonial Theology,” 47. 205. See Martin Scorsese’s movie The Wolf of Wall Street. 206. “I had three doses of the immigrant experience, not just one, so it imprinted itself quite deeply. First when I was uprooted as a child and brought to Australia; then when I declared my independence and returned to France; then when I gave up on France and came back to Australia. ‘Is this where I belong?’ I asked with each move. ‘Is this my true home?’ ‘You went back to France—I forgot about that. One day you must tell me more about that period of your life. But what is the answer to your question? Is this your true home?’ She waves a hand in a gesture that encompasses not just the room in which they are sitting but also the city and, beyond that, the hills and mountains and deserts of the continent. He shrugs. ‘I have always found it a very English concept, home. Hearth and home, say the English. To them, home is the place where the fire burns in the hearth, where you come to warm yourself. The one place where you will not be left out in the cold. No, I am not warm here.’ He waves a hand in a gesture that imitates hers, parodies it. ‘I seem to be cold wherever I go. Is that not what you said of me: You cold man?’ The woman is silent. ‘Among the French, as you know, there is no home. Among the French to be at home is to be among ourselves, among our kind. I am not at home in France. Transparently not. I am not the we of anyone.” Coetzee, Slow Man, locs. 179 – 80, Kindle. 207. Nhat Hanh, Breathe, You Are Alive, 114. 208. Sabine Baring-Gould, “Now the Day Is Over” ( 1865 ): Now the day is over, night is drawing nigh, Shadows of the evening steal across the sky. Jesus, give the weary calm and sweet repose; With Thy tend’rest blessing may our eyelids close. Grant to little children visions bright of Thee; Guard the sailors tossing on the deep blue sea. Comfort ev’ry suff’rer watching late in pain; Those who plan some evil from their sin restrain. When the morning wakens, then may I arise Pure, and fresh, and sinless in Thy holy eyes. 209. Dussel, “Epistemological Decolonization,” 33. 210. Ellacuría, Escritos teológicos, 135. My translation. 211. Marcos, “Mesoamerican Women’s Indigenous Spirituality,” 85. 212. Thurman, cited in Bailie, Violence Unveiled, xv. 213. Galeano, Memory of Fire Trilogy, locs. 1379 – 80, Kindle. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.