2 Praying Truly, with a Lump in the Throat If you are a theologian, you will pray truly. And if you pray truly, you are a theologian. —Evagrios the Solitary 28 Introduction: Praying With I have prayed since I was in my mother’s womb. All I do in life is pray. To pray is to keep myself alive, to breathe life into the world. To pray is to discover worlds that I have not known, heard, or experienced yet. I never pray alone. On the contrary, the event of prayer is always an event of with-ness, a way to be with somebody, fully, intensely, listening, silencing, speaking, breathing together. I pray with God, with somebody else. To pray with somebody is to be told of a God unknown. Being with somebody is to have God birthed into my life, again and again. And to the God I receive, every time I praise, I honor, I am grateful. I am deeply transformed, changed, moved from my own places of comfort and security. To pray with somebody is to have my horizons shifted, broken, undone, reinvented. That is why praying is such a troubling act: because we act and are acted upon, word and performance giving shape to my soul, marking my body, disturbing my mind, moving my emotions, challenging my allegiances, changing my faith, reinventing my life. I pray for those alive, but I never forget those who died. I always pray with them. I cannot stop praying for those who have left us. For instance, I pray every day for Oscar Alberto Martínez Ramírez and his almost two-year-old daughter, Valeria. 29 They drowned trying to cross the Rio Grande from Mexico to United States. I cannot stop praying with them. I weep their death every day. I pray with the refugees and their disgraced lives. I pray with immigrants on the move. I pray with people who have become homeless. I pray with children who do not have anyone who loves them and those living under violence. I pray with people with mental illness, I pray with people at the margins, I pray with all those who can’t make it. I also pray with nature. I pray with trees being murdered, the ocean life being destroyed, the birds being decimated, the bees being killed by pesticides, with the earth being poisoned by chemicals, the mountains being extracted, the rocks and minerals becoming things. They are myself, living beings just as I am a living being. When I pray with all of them, I am working on my memory, on forms of belonging, on my commitments with God, trying to figure out who I am and how I must live. When I pray I learn to desire what matters, what can keep us all alive, what should be searched, stopped, rebuilt, paused... what needs life breathed into many forms of living. When I pray I am using the Christian understanding of “religion,” which comes from the Latin verb religare, meaning to reconnect, to place together again. So when I pray I am reconnecting with God, with myself, with others, with the earth, and I am placed back together with those who are at the end of our forms of life, the ones we are taught and ordered to discard and forget. When I pray I try to unlearn most of what was taught: I try to get out of my Western forms of rationality, my exclusive monotheism, the double bind of God caught in “transcendent vs. immanent” frames, my superior forms of feeling human, my desire for things I don’t need, my belief that I am enough with myself, my unconscious forms of progress and development. When I pray I make vows, commitments that will orient my life. To these vows I bow down in faithfulness and steadiness. When I pray I am emotional, I am deeply moved within me, I am thrown into a place I can’t control, I can’t fathom, I can’t imagine. When I pray I wonder. I have learned that praying is to be in awe, to be taken by wonder. I am always in the company of stars, fungi, air, universes, mountains, little creatures. When I pray I silence. I listen deeply. I drop any grasping and am thrown into a field of impermanence. When I pray, my whole body prays with me. My body rests in its breathing, lightens up into unknown forms of life, rays of color and states of mind that make all of my senses alive. When I pray I feel the currents of rivers underneath moving within the earth with a gush of might that I can only honor. I also pray with my soul, asking my fears to be taken away. Oh my soul, why are you so restless within me? Every time I dialogue with my soul, I have to be prepared to listen back. I pray for evil to be won over, for my uncontrollable desires be controlled, for loneliness not to scare me too much. I pray for all the evil within me to be taken away, to be transformed into blessings. I pray for constant healing, for gratitude never to leave my heart. I pray for the grudges to go away, for forgiveness to wash me fully, for speed not to consume my days. I pray that my atrocities, my monstrosity, my envy, my jealousy, my anger, my frustrations, my desire of death be turned into a field of good energies. Then I am thrown back into the with-ness of life, being together, entangled, and responsible for every single thread of life that makes me who I am, always becoming in this endless life with no death. Universes without end. When I pray I am often lost, figuring out somebody else as a way to come back to myself. But then, I hear my children’s voice and I am back somewhere deep within me. I hear the birds and I am reconnected. I hear and see the dancing moves of the trees, the presence and the absence of animals and people who are here and gone, and I am awakened. People ask me if I believe in prayer. I say first that prayer doesn’t make any sense. What can prayer do? Why do we think we have extra powers to change anything? How arrogant we are to even ask anything of God, of life. Having been in violent, death-driven places, I cannot say prayer can do something. Prayer does not protect anyone, does not bring food to anyone’s table, it does not provide a doctor for those dying. In fact, prayer does not do a thing. So I do not believe in prayer. I can’t! But then, I must continue my answer by saying that I absolutely believe in prayer. How can I not believe in prayer? As I mentioned in the introduction, my mother taught me to pray and I never leave the house without praying. To leave the house without a prayer is like leaving the house naked, unprotected, unhinged. Prayers can do wonders, make miracles, transform people. Prayers are castles of protection for the weak, a king’s bed for the weary, bread for the hungry, a hug for the lonely, a gentle smile to the fearful. Prayers are a breath of life into the world that can shift the flow of movements and webs of connectivity. Prayers heal, cast away the demons, and bring life that was never there. Have you been to a church where people need God? I mean truly need God for survival? If you know such a church, you know that prayers enact miracles! How arrogant can I be not to believe in prayer? How can I think that my rationality is my only measure of life and my compass of life? How dare I not pray every day and for everything? Oh yes, I so believe in prayer. Absolutely! I would joyfully pray with those who, like the poet Paul Valéry, say, “What should we be without the help of that which does not exist? Very little.” 30 The Interior/Exterior Life of the One Who Prays: When We Truly Pray The Jewish liberation theologian Marc Ellis writes about the prophet and the prophetic. In a poetic book called Finding Our Voice: Embodying the Prophetic and Other Misadventures, Ellis wrestles with the voice of the prophet and the prophetic. He writes, “When we speak for others, we speak for ourselves. Our voice is entangled. Even the primal prophetic is negotiated. Our voice is not only for others or ourselves. Our voice is an intermediary, a way of bridging the gap between I and the world.” 31 When we pray, we speak for others, we claim their rights, we describe their situations, we demand justice, we utter a scream with the hopes that it will get somewhere where things can be changed. But when we weep for those suffering, we are also crying for ourselves, claiming our own lives. Our voice is always blurred since there is no separation between others and ourselves. We are a “we” intrinsically connected, entangled. When we pray we are responsible not only for the prayers we utter but also for those for whom and with whom we pray. Because at the end of the day, we are always praying with somebody. Ellis writes that “our voice is not only for others or ourselves. Our voice is an intermediary, a way of bridging the gap between ‘I’ and the world,” 32 and I would add between us and each other, between “we” humans and animals and the earth. That means that we must be careful with the ways we pray for and with, and careful about the bridges we build. Bridges must always have a double movement, coming and going, crossing and staying. As Christians, we must pay attention to the ways we pray and how our prayer can be a way to confirm our own sense of selves in the lives of others. For example, how much is our prayer a construct of our desires, a play of mirrors, a way of turning others into ourselves, with the same abilities we have, the same forms of thinking, believing, and living we are used to? Prayer can be very dangerous, for it carries a mighty seed of coloniality, of control, of measurement—especially where Christianity is a part of power dominance. Because through prayer, we can be more an apparatus of governments than agents of a kin-dom 33 of life-giving, prophetic voice and confrontation. From where do we pray when we pray to God? With whom do we pray and where are we praying with them? When Christians universalize our object of love, our sense of justice, our ways of living, we are praying mostly for ourselves and our own religion. We are mostly bringing peace to our hearts and civic confirmation of our patriotic life. When our prayers confirm the exclusive ways of our religious tribes, the racial structures of our thinking and feeling, the normativity of gender and sexual rules, we are praying only with ourselves. In this self-centered prayer, naming somebody else is just a disguise to keep us within the bounds of our own beliefs without being transformed. For instance, when prayers are more concerned with the protection of countries and with the keeping of state borders, we have lost the powerful ways prayer can undo not only individuals but also nations. To pray is to be fundamentally transformed. When we pray, truly pray, we are thrown outside of ourselves and into the lives of others. When we truly pray, house doors are unlocked and opened for immigrants, and we break down refugee camps and welcome immigrants and refugees into our rural and urban communities. When we truly pray, our racism is challenged, and we start to see everything differently. To pray truly is to understand with Frantz Fanon that “the black soul is a construction by white folk,” 34 and we start to see history as a pile of white events that have always taught us to be racists, fearing minorities and their unknown forms of freedom and ways of living. When we pray, truly pray, our religious, civic, sexual, secular, and sacred patterns are undone. Constitutions are rewritten. Borders are broken down. Violence within the Christian religion is denounced. Patriarchalism and the power of men go tumbling down, bigotry and intolerance are not accepted, white supremacy is erased. When we pray truly, we do not accept that any religious leader becomes rich. No one who gets rich with religion is accepted in this communal gathering of praying people. We all must have the same. When we truly pray, we pray against capitalism, as capitalism is the work of the devil, creating inequalities and distorted historical views of Jesus, who never owned anything. We learn with Mary’s true prayer: God has brought down the powerful from their thrones, and lifted up the lowly; God has filled the hungry with good things, and sent the rich away empty. (Luke 1: 46 – 55 NRSV) As we fight to change the world, when we pray, truly pray, we are the ones transformed by the ones we are praying for and with. In that way, to pray is to be prophetic. As Ellis writes: The prophetic is about Thou and I, separated and intertwined. The political and economic systems of every time and place have to be scrutinized. Judgment is essential. The political and economic systems of society are called to task precisely when they crush the weak. In the Bible, the widow, the orphan, the poor and the stranger are victims of unjust systems. Their very being, their Thou, is under assault by a system that remakes persons into objects, it. To justify such an unjust system, God is objectified as well. People as objects. God as object. 35 The I and Thou is also a way to understand the individual and the social systems, the political and the personal, the natural and the cultural, prayer and belief. All integrated, all part of each other, shaping, moving, and making us who we are. Another way that we need to think/feel when we truly pray is the way we relate with nature. Meadows are not distant places. The earth is not a background to our living. Animals are not things and they are not less than humans. Trees and plants are living beings who deserve the same respect that we give to people. Fungi and coral reefs are fundamental to our living. When we truly pray, we see the web of life, where nature and the cosmos are deeply connected, not the bottom of a pyramid of values or a resource to be exploited for profit and money. If we pray truly, we do no harm to the earth and all its precious living beings. That also means that if we pray truly, we learn to pray with the Indigenous people. We stand near them, with them, for their survival and fullness of life. Eliane Brum is a Brazilian journalist living with the Indigenous people in Brazil, a prophet in the ways Ellis understands the word. When she describes her work, she describes herself. When she talks about her craft we can perceive how we can see each other as praying people, praying and working, ora et labora, in the world. Brum writes, “Being the journalist I am, means putting on the skin of the Other. And the Other’s skin is language, the first world we each inhabit.” 36 There is something to the fact that when Native people who have other languages now fight for their lives, but in the language of the colonizer, they turn the language of the colonizer into a “language of insurrection.” Brum’s language is her body and to speak the language of insurrection means she needs to inhabit a body of insurrection as well, trying to connect the world of those disgraced by the system and those graced by the iniquities of colonized political and economic frameworks. In order to do that, she lives with the people she is writing about for a while in order to understand their language, their views, and their ways of thinking and feeling. She describes her work in almost the same ways Ellis describes the prophetic: I make my body a bridge between such diverse Brazils.... Resisting the domestication of our eyes by reaching for the singularity of each person’s life is what allowed me to stitch each small report together.... Reality is an intricate fabric, sewn not only from words but also from textures, smells, colors, gestures. Marks. From voids, excesses, nuances, and silences. Ruins.... A news story also demands an initial radical movement: crossing the wide street of yourself. This is perhaps the most profound and also the hardest act. It demands that you uninhabit yourself to inhabit the Other, the world that is the Other. We become capable of accomplishing this only by listening with all of our senses, the kind of listening that palpates what is said as much as what goes unsaid, what sounds and resounds as much as what is silent. 37 Again, how can our prayers become a bridge? How can our prayers go from speaking to becoming a deep listening event? How can we truly listen to people we are praying with? However, unless the praying person is doing exactly that, one is not truly praying. For to pray is to listen viscerally, to the point of uninhabiting ourselves from what we believe so we can try to hear as fully as possible the one we are praying with. How can we truly pray by inhabiting ourselves knowing that to uninhabit ourselves is impossible? Nonetheless, we try! We try to listen attentively, so deeply that the other starts to matter more than my own life, as if my life depended on the one I am listening to. Our lives being deeply tied to the ones we are praying for and mostly with is to pray truly. For my prayer is what can give life to me and the other, working prayer, ora et labora. If, for Brum, “writing is a physical, carnal act,” 38 to pray is also an act of incarnation. To pray is not only to put my mouth where my gestures are but to put our bodies where we pray. To go be with those we are praying. Otherwise we cannot truly pray. Unless we are with those we are praying with, we do not fully pray. Brum lived for three months with a woman who was dying. She truly prayed with her. To stay with someone who is sick, to be with those who are homeless, to be with those who are at the borders, this is a true prayer. When we breathe the same air as those who are suffering, we realize that our prayers must demand much more than words in our hearts. Prayers demand a kind of work that breaks with systems, that disrupts and troubles ways of living and being. But this is so hard. When is it that we pray? Truly? The Desert: Solitude We must understand the call to uninhabit ourselves with care: the processes of colonization often strip away the very core of one’s beliefs, the relation between one’s cosmologies and the ways of living with the earth. In order for one to uninhabit oneself, one must be aware of at least two things: one must know one’s own inner worlds and the sources, materials, forces, and combustions by which one is formed, and one must be able to engage in a power analysis of one’s privilege, positionality, desires, and goals. In other words, one must look inward and outward at the same time. The look inward is only possible if one can carry together both a sense of solitude and a sense of connection. In some forms of Christian spirituality, we see an emphasis on individual, detached forms of life that tend to isolate one person with God without much connectivity with a larger world. That means I must pray for what I want, for what I need, without the demand of desiring the same for my neighbor. But Christian spirituality is not a race where the one who prays more will get more. We don’t pray to get something. We don’t pray to own anything. We pray to become somebody else. We pray to affirm ourselves in collective ways. My identity, fully learned within myself, gives space to a larger sense of humanity. This larger sense of humanity can only be constituted by ways of an exterior presence, an outside gaze, toward somebody who is not the repetition of my own self. However, when one is placed in a situation of social isolation, in a situation of not having anything, then to pray for food, health, and home makes total sense. This is when the Christian religion should come to organize these needs in a collective sense. The life-giving prayers then are prayers for the needs of all, for everyone to have what they really need. When we think of a collective sense of Christian prayer or of the Christian faith, we think about the well-being of the other. Where can we find this form of prayer? When the resources of the community are shared and given to the members? When the church pays people’s health insurance, or house payments, or credit card bills, or college tuition? Josh Robinson, a pastor and friend of mine, sent me a picture of an offering envelope saying, “Pastor, I took $ 20. I will bring it back in a week.” We are not aware of people’s needs and we do not want to know anything about them. Members of our middle-class churches can only continue to be accepted as members of their churches if they continue to pay their mortgage. If they don’t and they become homeless, what church will support these families? When I was pastor of a tiny, poor church in the outskirts of São Paulo, Brazil, we were trying to raise money to buy a piece of land and build our own building to serve the community. But people’s needs were much more pressing than any building. After an enormous effort on the part of the congregation to raise three hundred dollars for our building, the roof of one of our members’ house fell in, and all the money had to go to fix his home. When the church is a true community, prayer takes on another meaning. African American churches in this country often have a strong program to give youth awards and support their entrance into college. Some churches pay bills of members in financial difficulties. Some churches provide food or medicine for the families around the community We tend to separate the inside and the outside of ourselves; when we pray, the inward and the outward move together. This division comes from our divided notion of the sacred or God. What is inside might not be outside, but it is the confluence of these realms that makes who we are. Marc Ellis writes of how we must pay attention to our interiority as well as our exteriority, as a single movement, to discover our own voices: Solitude and solidarity define our lives. Art and poetry come from this tension. Our words about God come from there. As poetic hope. Not less. Not more. God-talk as poetic hope. The prophetic as embodied poetic hope. On the edge of despair. Attempting to pry open the possibility of meaning in our lives and world... The prophet embodies the—possibility—of God. Much more than prayer. Is the prophet embodied prayer? On the threshold of meaning. In history. Of God. Like love and beauty, always en route. Starting over each day... When the prophet hears “liturgy,” he thinks “death.” The incense is too much at religion’s High Noon altar. As if any God worth her salt wouldn’t think the same. Imagine God desiring worship in an unredeemed world. Scandal! The prophet’s liturgy is vigilance. The prophet constantly fights the demons of despair. The prophet’s field of battle is the world and the no-hope hope that envelops him. 39 Prayer is also a part of the prophetic performance, dealing consistently with this binomial structure: solitude and solidarity. Finding oneself and God in this relation. Solitude is the awareness of oneself and the ability to stand with oneself fully, all connected. Solidarity is the awareness of one’s surroundings and the world at large, with the ability to keep vigil with those who have their lives in danger. Solitude and solidarity can both bring despair and peace. The ability to find peace within oneself makes the one who prays able to go through despair. The grounding that only solitude brings to oneself is the deep relation with the earth. Grounding is becoming one with the earth. That sense makes us be at home in the world. The awareness of pain around the world brings compassion that makes us move towards those who are suffering. Grounding and compassion are the two feelings/thoughts that help us move through life. Spiritual practices that help us find grounding and compassion are technologies of the self that make us live full circle within ourselves and the world. But we do not learn that just by thinking or praying. We need spiritual ritual practices that help us orient our desires, our bodies, and our minds. We have learned to run, to move, to conquer, to own, to fill our lives with actions and accomplishments, creation, and progress. We need spiritual practices to unlearn this way of living and learn other ways. No wonder Jesus went to the desert frequently. It is a place that brings a sense of isolation, either real or imagined, where one is confronted by a sense of wilderness, both outside and inside, that brings challenges and wonders. In the desert one learns to live with oneself, to slough off or work off one’s worries, fears, and anxieties. For Jesus, the wilderness was a place to feel, to listen, to be. “Rooted in re-tellings of the exodus traditions, the desert or wilderness was a spatial metaphor for a period of self-reckoning or transition, of deep psyche confrontation that had to do with exile and diasporic uncertainty,” says biblical scholar Maia Kotrosits. 40 The retelling of stories, the wonderings, the learning about oneself in a place filled with various other forms of life brings a certain clearing, perhaps openings that make us see ourselves in ways that break prejudices, hatred, anger, internalized oppression, and the desire to conquer, to own, to acquire. The desert is alive, the desert carries a call, it brings us to different parts of our interior lives. “The road of cleansing goes through that desert. It shall be named the way of holiness,” said the ancient desert elders, invoking the prophet Isaiah. 41 Holiness is to find the oneness in ourselves, to understand ourselves as connected with every little creature, with rocks, plants, trees, stars, animals, and people. It is a process of folding and unfolding. The fullness of the desert unfolds into complete emptiness. This emptiness scares us. We live lives filled with so many things to sustain us that we forget that we already have what we need to survive. The desert also leads us to discern the causes of our suffering, our desires or cravings, the ways we have been formed, and our historical traumas. The desert can be a place where we have no other place to go but inward. Terrifyingly so. The desert gives us the company of our loneliness. To pray alone is to take oneself into a place of solitude in order to learn how to be in solidarity with someone else. This tradition of monastic life and doing laundry is also present in Christian and Buddhist monasteries where prayers, meditations, tending the earth, cooking, or doing the laundry must be done as a prayer, truly, mindfully. Solidarity: Living with the Absurdities of Our Time The look inward strengthens us to look outwards, in solidarity with others. At the same time, the more we are in solidarity with others, the more we need solitude. From the fall of 2018 to the spring of 2019 I traveled to four continents. I saw much pain, death, disaster, ruin, and destruction. I heard the noise of the absurdity of life in many ways in distinct sounds. I was reminded of the Latin meaning of the word absurd. Ab-surdus is a sound so loud that it makes one deaf. Having grown up in Brazil, a country of daily absurdities, immense inequalities, white supremacy, racism, and destruction, I have that noise within me. Having witnessed as a pastor the ab-surdus among undocumented people in United States, and then, on that multi-continental journey, the signs of climate change, the brutal violence of nation-states, the utter poverty of so many, the many forms of suffering of the people of the Philippines, South Africa, Jamaica, and refugees from Syria, Africa and other countries around the Mediterranean Sea, I felt my heart fall to the ground. And yet, standing with people who participated in this global project of prayer, I felt a deep sense of solidarity run through my body. Seeing people’s forms of resilience and creativity, their refusal and denial, their challenges and resurrections, made me think and feel that life is always bigger than we can even imagine. In all of that I had a sense of solidarity paired with the absurdity of it all. A sense of togetherness that saved me from falling into the abyss of despair. After witnessing several accounts of evil, violence, and death, I cannot tell these stories without the strength of life, the resilience of people and the ways life bursts out everywhere. What I felt every time I traveled was a mix of feelings enmeshed in the tasks of preparing and doing the event, being with people, listening to many stories, writing prayers, and feeling that indeed, something can be done through prayer. And yet I have a clear sense that the prayers cannot capture the intensity of situations. My solidarity is always bursting into shouts of glory and on the verge of drowning in a river of tears, asking for God’s mercy. The interior and the exterior of ourselves, never fully divided is how we inhabit the world. To uninhabit parts of ourselves is to inhabit other forms of being within and without. During these travels I realized how unbalanced I was and how much I did not pay attention to my interior life. I was so anxious with everything I had to prepare and the things I was seeing that I became overwhelmed. Before I went to the Philippines, I knew that people who work against injustice there could be arrested by the police. When we got there, the national council of churches told us that we could be arrested by the police and gave us instructions of how to proceed. That was beyond my limits. I was so anxious that I developed tinnitus, an intermittent sound in my ears. Ab-surdus! I got desperate and had to ground myself in God, engaging in prayer, meditation, and therapy. I needed to have strong bonds of connection, voices that kept holding me saying, “come back, don’t go there.” Voices from loved ones became repeated signposts that helped turn me around and turn to the better places within me. I learned to be peaceful at the threshold of the abyss. The earth called me back, as did the birds, my family, those whom I love. They were there: deep solidarity bringing me to a solitude where I needed to hear myself, and myself in relation to others. Then, rooted and grounded, I was ready to be in solidarity with others. Only when I am connected, organized around solitude and solidarity can I pray truly, a prayer of revolution, a prayer that changes me and others, and the world around me. Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel describes the revolution that prayer brings: Prayer is meaningless unless it is subversive, unless it seeks to overthrow and to ruin the pyramids of callousness, hatred, opportunism, falsehoods. The liturgical movement must become a revolutionary movement, seeking to overthrow the forces that continue to destroy the promise, the hope, the vision. 42 A revolutionary prayer can infuse with passion the liturgical life of a community and create movements of transformation; it can help us denounce violence and inner and outer destruction and enable us to announce a life without poverty. A revolutionary prayer makes us aware of the ones with whom we are in solidarity so that we can count ourselves among those who are fighting for life, especially for those who do not count amidst those who are included. Our work is to be with and pray with those beyond the commons, what is understood as “the public.” In The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning & Black Study, Stefano Harney and Fred Moten make us see that the conditions of oppression and death and disaster of our world are not only bad for the poor, or the Africans, or the immigrants or the refugees. This situation we are living in is death for all of us. The difference is that it kills the refugees faster than the citizens of the world. The “undercommons” are those who are under the line of full citizenship, of full humanity. We can add refugees to the list of people mentioned here: If you want to know what the undercommons wants, what black people, Indigenous peoples, queers and poor people want, what we (the “we” who cohabit in the space of the undercommons) want, it is this—we cannot be satisfied with the recognition and acknowledgement generated by the very system that denies a) that anything was ever broken and b) that we deserved to be the broken part; so we refuse to ask for recognition and instead we want to take apart, dismantle, tear down the structure that, right now, limits our ability to find each other, to see beyond it and to access the places that we know lie outside its walls. We cannot say what new structures will replace the ones we live with yet, because once we have torn shit down, we will inevitably see more and see differently and feel a new sense of wanting and being and becoming. What we want after “the break” will be different from what we think we want before the break and both are necessarily different from the desire that issues from being in the break. 43 To uninhabit ourselves is to inhabit ourselves with those living in the undercommons, to have them live inside us as ourselves, as the other of our own selves. Together, our prayer is the continued destruction of systems that keep people under the power of official and unofficial necropolitics; by necropolitics I mean a politics that gives life for those who belong to the system and organizes a political structure of death and dying for those who are the excess to the system, the undercommons. Any prayer that prays for any government and its necropolitics is not a true prayer, and it is against the gospel, serving only those who keep the system. Woe to them! Prayers of understanding, niceness, and conformity are only prayers that serve to protect those in the commons. This is prayer turned in on itself. 44 To pray, truly, is to “turn shit down,” as Harney and Moten write, to break and to stay in the break—in solidarity with those in the living undercommons. We live in the midst of nation-states creating ruins everywhere. Nationalisms, patriarchalisms, white supremacy, neoliberalism, and extractivisms 45 are expanding colonized powers. Destructions, killings, lack of health, dignified ways of living, the earth burning. Everything is eroding. The Brazilian singer Gilberto Gil, now almost eighty years old, was persecuted during military coups in Brazil in the 1960 s. He was put in jail, exiled, and suffered a great deal at the hands of the military. Eventually Gil went back to Brazil and continued his career. Now that Brazil has a president who supports torture and the killing of minorities, he says this about this president, “Bolsonaro, inspire me to pray.” The prayer Gil is mentioning is the integration of the interior and the exterior life of someone who knows that to survive evil, one must pray, truly, paying attention to that which grounds us so we can continue in solidarity with those in the undercommons. Solidarity, via solitude. Praying with a Lump in the Throat: Sacramental Prayers I remember a scene in Ai Weiwei’s documentary Human Flow. 46 Ai was interviewing a survivor of the war in Syria. They were in an abandoned place where there were open holes in the ground where people were buried. An older man, walking between those holes, took identity cards from his pocket, identified several members of his family, and said, “Look, here is my wife, my daughter, my cousin, my sister, my son, they are all buried here. They are all gone. What do I do now?” And he started crying as if it were the only thing in the world left to do. After that testimony, I prayed with a lump in my throat. I keep thinking about the Palestinians and the Dalits. Their lives and conditions exhibit the most horrendous forms of violence, brutality, defacement, social decomposition, abandonment, open chambers of fire, slow death, utter ethno-caste destruction. They are people who go through rituals of humiliation and destitution. Every time I remember them, I pray with a lump in my throat. Reading Nancy Pineda-Madrid’s Suffering and Salvation in Ciudad Juarez, I could not help praying with a lump in my throat: Far more often than not the pain of others, particularly that brought on by institutionalized power, remains sequestered from public view. We find numerous ways to keep the social suffering of our time at bay, distant. It slips in and out of our awareness with the passing stories we read in our daily newspapers. Undoubtedly we realize that recognizing social suffering will be personally costly. It is far easier to view the pain of others as a misfortunate occurrence, the poor luck of the draw, rather than as a product brought about by unjust systems and structures. 47 The brutal deaths of hundreds of girls and women in Ciudad Juarez described by Pineda-Madrid are, like Elaine Brum’s journalism, a bridge made with her body, a deep listening that sheds light on people in the shadows. Tragedy gains a shape with Pineda-Madrid’s writing. She offers us a gift to be in solidarity with those who suffer and die. And I pray. Truly. With a lump in my throat. I remember the first time I saw the art of Doris Salcedo, a Colombian visual artist and sculptor, and immediately felt a lump in my throat. There was something there that was way too recognizable, too vivid, too real, and yet unable to be fully grasped, understandable, given to the fullness of any form of rationality. Before Salcedo’s art, we must respond with all of our senses, since it is our body that can identify the full force of the transgression and the loss that are portrayed. There is something to the devastation, desolation and mourning of extreme forms of violence that we can only recognize in our bodies, perhaps with a feeling of a lump in the throat. Salcedo’s art is a mirror of our guts after they have been shuffled and turned over by the filthy hand of violence, convulsing our inner organs and shutting down the light that shines on us. Salcedo’s work represents the telling of the stories of people who were lost, who were abandoned, who faced disasters, with violence breaking into their lives and leaving them drifting, their selves shattered to different pieces and places, with traumatic memories, their beings filled with pain and mourning. Salcedo’s work is a work of listening, containing years of research and interviews with suffering people. Her work does not restore what is lost or destroyed, but it helps us mourn, and the work of mourning is fundamental. It makes us engage our wounds and the violence lodged in our bodies. Salcedo helps us create a sense of solidarity with those who have been there, for they are us. We could have been they. Doris Salcedo’s work is much like a Christian sacrament, in the sense of Augustine’s definition of a sacrament as “the outward sign of an inner grace.” Sacraments show externally what happens inside of us. Salcedo’s work does that too. The sacraments are also the presence of an absence. Without the absence of God, we would not need to have a sacrament. We celebrate the mourning of a God who also died mercilessly and brutally. The humiliation, the defacement, and the destitution of Jesus’s mind, body, and soul were too vivid, beyond horror, like the works Doris Salcedo shows us. God’s presence in Jesus was taken away from the world. Jesus massacred, killed, to the point of making social memory only the pain, the thorns, the cry, and the shame of Jesus’s naked body—just like so many people in our world today. The cross and the lynching tree. 48 That is why the death of Jesus is so close to the violence lived by so many in our world. The cruelty around the world, the deaths perpetrated by the state are what we live today too. That is why for marginal communities the lives of the martyrs are so important. Third, Salcedo’s works of art and the Christian sacraments work within the framework of memory, grief, and agency. For Salcedo, the memories of lost ones are fundamental to the re-compositions of social and individual memories. Grief is a work that must be done collectively and individually. Agency is in the making and in the participation in the work of art. For the Christian sacraments, the grief of the tragic death of Jesus is a weekly or daily act to remind us of the ones who continue to be defaced and humiliated in our world daily. The subversive memory of Jesus is the reinstating of new possibilities, of what the past and present can still do, the actualization and the experience of a living God who is absent but also fully present! The work of remembering and the work of grief enable us to restitute ourselves to a point of self-restoration perhaps when we feel that we can respond and move forward. It is the absurdity of the resurrection that makes us think that life after a horrendous death is possible. Fourth, both the sacraments and Salcedo’s work make visible what is invisible and give us new ways of living. Salcedo’s work gives a name to our loss, helping us see our inner and outer lives under states of oppression and unspeakable violence. In this way, her art helps us orient our interior life within a social life marked by horrors and fears. By making loss and responses visible, her work of art calls back to life what was thrown into abjection and forgetfulness, helping us to identify and remember the shame and the unnamable tragedies people go through. Between the horror and the wonders of her art, she tells us what is still there, in our social-spiritual life and histories; she helps us find some form of strength by going deep into it and helping us find our way around it all. It is a both/and event: Salcedo’s art helps us not to hold back what is fundamental to what happened to us, what made us who we have become, but also, to move on with it with some sort of healing. Holy Week teaches us that we need to learn to linger in loss and death for a while. Jesus’s companions could do nothing from Friday until Sunday. They did not have the assurance that we have today. Death was a full death, and nothing could change it. Until it was changed! Holy Week and Salcedo’s work help us learn that sometimes we have to linger in difficult places. Salcedo’s work 1, 550 Chairs Stacked Between Two City Buildings 49 in Istanbul and her 280 chairs placed at the Palace of Justice in Bogotá 50 remind us of the absence of the bodies that were taken away. Chairs are sacramental reminders of someone’s absence. The arrangement of candles in Bolívar Square in Bogotá 51 to remind us of the civil war victims is an invitational piece of art where viewers become participants, adding candles to the installation. Witnessing and participating in her work, people come together and see that we all inhabit a humanity that is frail and susceptible to disasters and tragedy. About her art work A Flor de Piel, 52 where she compressed rose petals together to show a woman tortured and killed. Salcedo says: “I look for the most fragile thing and there is nothing more fragile than a body in pain.” That saying reminded me of James Cone’s saying that theology starts where it hurts. How can we, artists and theologians and liturgists, help our communities to do the work of memory, grief, and agency? How can we pray truly, with a lump in our throat? Ñe`é Eliane Brum tells us of the word Ñe`é in the language of the Guarani-Kaiowá, an Indigenous people who have been murdered since colonization and yet resist. She says, “ Ñe`é means word and soul, it is word-soul.” 53 The word Ñe`é encapsulates in many ways the meanings of her work. She writes with the soul and her words are not only words but her soul itself. We can learn from her about the meaning of prayer as well. She says that, as a reporter, Inhabiting bodies, converting this experience into words, is something visceral, definitive of what I am. All of how I view the world is mediated by an incommensurable love for the infinite absurdity of reality... Ñe`é. It is a word and soul at the same time. It is in this other language, neither mine nor yours, that I find something that defines my search. In the vortex of the between worlds, I want to be a word that acts. 54 Yes, prayer lives in between worlds, the worlds that I inhabit with my soul, the worlds with which I am fully, words and soul, in solidarity with people and the worlds that also make who I am, and the worlds to which I belong. Prayer is the soul uttering a word, a word that acts and composes our soul and our living. When I pray truly, I am blessed by words that expand my soul and my soul breathes into words that help me act. Words that mediate an incommensurable love for the infinite absurdity of reality. If I am to pray truly, I must pray with somebody else, take into consideration all these words, with all their souls, and the lumps in my throat, so that I can make words into life, words into soul, soul into words. Ñe`é. 28. Evagrios, On Praye r, no. 61. 29. Kaufman, “Story Behind Horrific Photo of Man and Toddler Drowning.” 30. Valéry, Outlook for Intelligence, 42. 31. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 28. 32. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 28. 33. The use of kin-dom has been popularized by Mujerista theologian Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz. See Isasi-Díaz, Mujerista Theology. 34. Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, 145. 35. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 28. 36. Brum, Collector of Leftover Souls, 3. 37. Brum, Collector of Leftover Sou ls, 5, 6. 38. Brum, Collector of Leftover Souls, 9. 39. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 15, 16, 22, 27. 40. This was given to me in a conversation with the wonderful scholar Maia Kotrosits, Assistant Professor of Religion at Denison University and author of Rethinking Early Christian Identity: Affect, Violence, and Belonging ( 2015 ) and The Lives of Objects: Material Culture, Experience, and the Real in the History of Early Christianity ( 2020 ). 41. Chryssavgis, In the Heart of the Desert, loc. 97, Kindle. 42. Heschel, “On Prayer,” 262. 43. Harney and Moten, The Undercommons, loc. 21, Kindle. 44. See Jenson, The Gravity of Sin. 45. “ Extractivism o, as extractive capitalism is known in the Américas, indicates an economic system that engages in thefts, borrowings, and forced removals, violently reorganizing social life as well as the land by thieving resources from Indigenous and Afro-descendent territories.” Gómez-Barris, Extractive Zone, loc. 189, Kindle. 46. Ai, Human Flow. 47. Pineda-Madrid, Suffering and Salvation, 59. 48. Cone, Cross and Lynching Tree. 49. Netke, “ 1550 Chairs Stacked Between Buildings.” 50. Noviembre 6 y 7 ( 2002 ). See the website of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago: https://www 3.mcachicago.org/ 2015 /salcedo/works/noviembre_ 6 _y_ 7 /. 51. Voon, “Doris Salcedo Fills a Public Square in Bogotá.” 52. Thompson, “A Flor de Piel.” 53. Brum, Brasil, loc. 1927, Kindle. 54. Brum, Brasil, loc. 16, Kindle. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.