10 Praying with the Night En route to the floor of the ocean the diver first passes through the “belt of the fishes.” This is a wide band of light reflected from the surface of the sea. From this area, he moves to a depth of water that cannot be penetrated by light above the surface. It is dark, foreboding and eerie. The diver’s immediate reaction is apt to be one of fear and sometimes a sudden spasm of panic that soon passes. As he drops deeper and deeper into the abyss, slowly his eyes begin to pick up the luminous darkness; what was fear is relaxed and he moves into the lower region with confidence and peculiar vision. —Howard Thurman 168 H oward Thurman speaks of “luminous darkness.” This term is what guides me in this chapter, evoking the movement between and within light and darkness, as a dance that reveals and hides and asks us for new eyes and new visions. In order to see our luminous darkness, we must be like a diver who goes through layers of realities and perceptions that prepare us to venture into the next place, until we find our own abyss. It is only there, within our own abyss, that we are finally able to see our own luminous darkness. It is a journey that demands a conscious choice, an ever growing awareness of ourselves. Thurman follows the passage above with the words of the psalmist: If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me Even the night shall be light about me... The darkness and the light are both alike to Thee. 169 Before the Introduction It is hard to pray for the night to come. Perhaps many of us still fear the night, its mysterious, uncontrollable nature, and the parts of us living there that we do not know, cannot see, or cannot handle. In the night we can be lost, or we can find ourselves. In the night we can feel alone or learn that we live in a different kind of inhabited world, with other presences we just don’t know yet. Once we approach the night without fear, we learn skills to live during the night, but also during the day. If we are not afraid of the night, we will be much less afraid of the day. As Psalm 91: 5 – 6 says, You will not fear the terror of the night, or the arrow that flies by day, or the pestilence that stalks in darkness, or the destruction that wastes at noonday. We will not fear, because we learned the lesson as in verses 1 and 2 of the same psalm: You who live in the shelter of the Most High, Will say to the Lord, “My refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.” The Most High is everywhere, abiding deep down in the earth and in the shadows beneath the earth. Night and day can be shelters or places of desolation, but wherever we might be, we have to find our trust within, in the light and darkness of the One who created the day and the night. In our common imagery, the night has mostly been a time and a place that holds feelings of fear, vulnerability, anxiety, adversity, lack of control, and the approach of the end. I grew up fearing the night. At home, when my father went to bed and I could no longer see the light under the door, I was terribly scared. Or when I, a city boy, would go to the countryside and look at the trees in the dark, I felt at the doorstep of the unknown and of all of the monsters that lived there. Then I started to be afraid of becoming blind. Every time I felt this I came close to fainting. This essay is a way of understanding these persistent fears and talking to my soul and in so doing, to offer something to yours. I am realizing that darkness is part of who I am and that it lives within my luminosity, just as my luminosity is dependent on my darkness. It is within this space of oneness and ambiguity that I am called to pray: to pray the night, to pray with the night. I cannot remember when or where I read the sentence, “Everything I know about my light I learned from my darkness,” but I know that it helped me to realize that the night was not my enemy. It offered me the perception of the night as a loving teacher, one living within me and with whom I could walk without wanting to run away. But how to understand that vast and deep darkness that is the night of the world? I began to understand when I heard Pedro Casaldáliga, my favorite theologian, say, “Only by living the dark night of the poor is it possible to live God’s day. The stars can only be seen at night.” 170 If the wrestling of the poor and the cry of the earth do not visit me day and night, I cannot hear the sounds of the night or understand the light of the day. Through the conflicts of my soul and the struggles of the poor, I have a sense of a circularity that abandons the telos of Christologies and of the Christian faith. I do not approach an end; I live in the full circularity of the now. If the now is lived in fullness, the future of that now is already here and the past of that now is fully re-lived. Past, present, and future are ubications of the same life happening fully at this very place and time, right here and now, with the whole earth breathing here with me. Introduction The notion of darkness is a very rich one and I hope it can help us think about our lives and ministries. 171 I am using “darkness” in a very broad sense and with both its negative and its positive aspects. Darkness is both a real and an imaginary place. Darkness lives outside and inside me without duality. Darkness is part of the extreme violence in the world today, violence perpetrated by humans towards ourselves, towards other humans, towards animals and other living creatures, towards the earth. Darkness is the end of life on Earth. But darkness is also our luminosity, a light that penetrates the deepest places to create joy and freedom. Darkness is the beginning of life on Earth. Darkness is all the thick places we inhabit. Listen with me to words about darkness. Achille Mbembe describes darkness as frighteningly beautiful: The darkness of the night—an opaque mask, yet so penetrable—imbued me, every time, with an indescribable fear with its legion of fireflies which were repeatedly said to germinate in each one a ghost, with its dismal chants of rusty flavor, salty from the corruptions of witchcraft, that kind of stoning, of perverse and immeasurable exhaustion that resisted the wreckage of the day and the ages of the world, with the skull of the caves. 172 The poet Luis Rosales puts it confidently: We will go by night, when the shadow of the whole earth comes together, by night, when the road smells of rosemary and sedge, we will go by night, by night, we will go without moon, without moon, for in order to find the fountain only our thirst can light the way. 173 Chet Raymo, in his work The Soul of the Night, relates the night to the wilderness: There is a tendency for us to flee from the wild silence and the wild dark, to pack up our gods and hunker down behind city walls, to turn the gods into idols, to kowtow before them and approach their precincts only in the official robes of office. And when we are in the temples, then who will hear the voice crying in the wilderness? Who will hear the reed shaken by the wind? 174 Hear the way the biblical prophet sees no distinction in God, who is light and darkness: I will give you the treasures of darkness and riches hidden in secret places, so that you may know that it is I, the LORD, the God of Israel, who call you by your name. (Isa 45: 3 NRSV) And how Mary inhabits the night as a hidden treasure from God: And Mary answered and said, “I will teach you about what is hidden from you.” 175 There is no light that can save us from the night. We try so hard: we have lights on everywhere, trying to hide the darkness of the world and ourselves. But the winter solstice always comes back to remind us of who we are. Darkness we are. The glorious darkness. Clark Strand, a Buddhist author and teacher, writes: In the modern world, petroleum may drive our engines but our consciousness is driven by light. And what it drives us to is excess, in every imaginable form. Beginning in the late 19 th century, the availability of cheap, effective lighting extended the range of waking human consciousness, effectively adding more hours onto the day—for work, for entertainment, for discovery, for consumption; for every activity except sleep, that nightly act of renunciation. Darkness was the only power that has ever put the human agenda on hold. Advances in science, industry, medicine and nearly every other area of human enterprise resulted from the influx of light.... The only casualty was darkness, a thing of seemingly little value. But that was only because we had forgotten what darkness was for. In times past people took to their beds at nightfall, but not merely to sleep. They touched one another, told stories and, with so much night to work with, woke in the middle of it to a darkness so luxurious it teased visions from the mind and divine visitations that helped to guide their course through life. Now that deeper darkness has turned against us. The hour of the wolf we call it—that predatory insomnia that makes billions for big pharma. It was once the hour of God. 176 That fear of the night has birthed many metaphors, so real and vivid that they visit our days and our nights. The transatlantic Western colonial formulations of race and the blackening of people as different, lower, and fearsome still control our minds, our daily lives, and politics today. It is what makes us create redlining, control the electoral process, build jails, cross the street when we see a Black person in front of us, ban people from Muslim countries, build walls against brown people from the South, and put pipelines in the sacred territories of Indigenous people. This kind of darkness shows us who we are in the world. What should be called light, we name darkness: The darkness of a world without jails where all Black people are free. The darkness of a world without borders. The darkness of a world in motion with people who do not look like us. The darkness of a world without Christianity as its epicenter. The darkness of a God without full and endless light. The darkness of a life without the safety of the only light (and shadow) of what we know. How then do we engage darkness as a precious gift of life and the darkness that comes to us as fear and terror, so that we embrace darkness and understand it? My thought here is that by embracing a wealth of possibilities within the notion of darkness, we can also find language to deal with the darkness of ourselves, the darkness of God, and the darkness of the world. The life abundant that Jesus promises to us has both light and darkness in it. The light of God can only be manifested where there is darkness; without darkness there is no light. We are creatures of the night and of the day and we must learn to have a positive sense of darkness. Then we will be able to speak, preach, care, listen, and offer solidarity to others based on the luminous darkness of ourselves within the darkness and light of the world. The Darkness of Others La Noche For many in the Latinx community, la noche involves a particular set of values and understandings. When someone says buenas noches, they are saying both hello and good-bye. The ability to say buenas noches as both arrival and departure can propitiate movements and strategies of survival. The night, for the Latinx community, is a place to hide and shift identities. A place to resist, to move away, beyond borders, away from the scrutiny of power and surveillance. Night is a tricky place where everything is malleable and can move according to the needs of the present. La noche is both a dangerous place where we can be destroyed and an ally where we escape control and devise ways to survive and strategies for life to continue. As María DeGuzmán says, I would point out that transhistorical, transcultural elements such as night, shadows, masks, and veils carry a particular historical and cultural charge at a particular time in the history of any given culture, where culture is understood not as a closed circuit but as permeated by other cultures. 177 La noche is a decolonial space: a place to be what we are, openly or disguised, a place for tricksters to appear, the coyote 178 to disguise himself and others, and the waters to carry those who are crossing to the other side. Still, the colonial powers always threaten the decolonial forms of disguise and knowledge. The coyotes can be coopted by a system of violence and brutality. When we do not know the night and the waters we are crossing, we can be killed. The night is risky. La noche carries the possibilities of political movements and aesthetic practices, ones that challenge the oppressive conditions of existence and the limits of art and survival. Illustration of this aesthetico-political practice is the mention of night in Cuban-American author Cristina García’s novel A Handbook to Luck: Under cover of night, the character Marta Claros flees the civil war in El Salvador and her abusive husband, who works on the firing squad killing rebels for the U.S.-backed military government: Marta had never seen a sky this dark. There was no moon, and the stars seemed to hide in the Black folds of midnight. The silence was so complete that Marta feared life itself had withdrawn from these parts. At any moment she might cross the border from one world to the next, imperceptibly, like death. The coyote said that a night like this was good cover, that the yanquis’ fiercest lights couldn’t penetrate it. 179 The night for the Latinx community is the inhabitation of the other Americanos, the ones below the borders. Since the fullness of America is only given to “certain” Americans, the living of the American identity is parsed by the government, pondered, negotiated, strategized, and only given to those who can get citizenship, or be worthy of such a form of humanity. The permanent fabricated crisis at the borders between the US and Mexico has several purposes. The borders fuel the militarization as a state policy, it creates investment for private profit, and through its power dynamics it defines what this country is, defining its own identity over against the shady people on the other side. The present “crisis” at the southern borders enhances the inhabitation of the night: darkness is a path to el Norte where coyotes are luminaries of the night. Under the cover of night, Central and Latin Americans are no more than the shadow of the real Americans who carry the might of modernity stamped on the flag of the United States. US American identity casts a thick shadow on foreign status, on immigrants, on “others.” Along with Blacks, Indigenous, and Muslims, people from Central and South American countries are thus dangerous since they threaten the very existence of our light. In the militarization of the borders, the lights of civility are cast over the shadows of uncivility of those beyond the wall, as if a humanity full of light must carry its own shadows in order to keep its light intact. No wonder the border patrols put immigrants in cages. Immigrants are indeed viewed as animals who crawl in the night. Border patrols with all-terrain vehicles, surveillance cameras, drones, helicopters, are all weapons of light to capture those who sneak in from the night. The money spent on border surveillance is a way of keeping the notion of US identity afloat. The enemy is the very condition of possibility for US identity. Even now our ancestors who lived in this land for ages are cast into the shadow of the light of the Empire. Because of the “enlightened” project of the Empire, Latinx people have had to learn the secrets and tricks of the night in order to survive. They have had to learn to represent themselves in many ways, and resist the darkness of jail. The night is filled with beasts, spirits, and creatures that we do not know and cannot control. The night is a threat, and its creatures can possess since we are not ready to negotiate with or expel them properly. There is no constancy, no patterns, no full knowledge during the night. No invocation of justice, of honor, of humanity is enough to change the status of immigrants as not fully human. Instead, every appeal for security measures, every announcement of walls being built, ends up creating new forms of oppression, bias, violence, and death. At night, as well as during the day, immigrants have to live in unruly territories. Again, what we do not realize is that the shadow we cast becomes our own light and we end up living under that shadow we project, which in turn dims the very light we were hoping to shine. We only see deepening of the darkness we were hoping to cast away. Worse, we become creatures not of the night with its fullness but creatures of shadows that are deeper than the shadows of the light we have cast. We become the frightening darkness we have been trying to avoid. We cannot control the night, just as those who inhabit the night cannot control the spirits of the night. This spirit-filled environment of the night has been a rich source for the magical realism of Latin American literature, lo real maravilloso, a term coined by Alejo Carpentier. 180 Magical realism is the imagination of the night run free during the day. The unconscious and the conscious live together as a way of finding life in its fullness. They Will Be Coming for Us That Night For African Americans, the night has long been a place of resistance and danger. It was during the night that people who were enslaved planned their escape. They forged paths and constructed maps (often sung) through waters with the help of signs in the skies, with hidden signs, strategies, and forms of survival and re-existence. Paths and forests and waters of the Underground Railroad, bushes, homes, churches, became places of escape, windows into dreams and transformations. The night was the place where a future of freedom was planned with persistence, strength, sweat, and blood, in which a new world was created. But the struggle of African Americans for fullness of life is far from ended. Prisons have taken the place of slavery. They are a place imagined by night, hidden from the public’s awareness, and placed into the budget of governments that create a school-to-prison pipeline to lock up the poor, especially African Americans. Prison is the en-light-ened panopticon to keep watch on those who belong to the night. 181 It is clear that the necropolitics of the US government want to keep African Americans in the shadows of society or the darkness of night in the prison system, without any chance of coming back to society. Prisons are the perpetuation of the night for people who are not allowed to live in the light of the day. On November 19, 1970, after the philosopher and activist Angela Davis’s arrest, early in her eighteen-month incarceration, the writer James Baldwin wrote to her in “An Open Letter to My Sister, Miss Angela Davis”: Dear Sister: One might have hoped that, by this hour, the very sight of chains on Black flesh, or the very sight of chains, would be so intolerable a sight for the American people, and so unbearable a memory, that they would themselves spontaneously rise up and strike off the manacles. But, no, they appear to glory in their chains; now, more than ever, they appear to measure their safety in chains and corpses. The enormous revolution in Black consciousness which has occurred in your generation, my dear sister, means the beginning or the end of America. Some of us, white and Black, know how great a price has already been paid to bring into existence a new consciousness, a new people, an unprecedented nation. If we know, and do nothing, we are worse than the murderers hired in our name. If we know, then we must fight for your life as though it were our own—which it is—and render impassable with our bodies the corridor to the gas chamber. For, if they take you in the morning, they will be coming for us that night. Therefore: peace, Brother James 182 Dreaming and Living in the Night: Our Luminous Darkness The Algerian-French writer Albert Camus wrote a short story, “The Adulterous Woman,” 183 in which Janine, a married woman who is full of life and passion, is frustrated by the existence she leads with a husband who does not notice her passion and vitality. One night, while they are traveling, she leaves Marcel in a hotel room and while he sleeps, she goes out into the night. It is at night that Janine feels her full self, filled with excitement and desires and a sense of freedom she had never felt before. As she goes deeper into the night, she goes deeper into this experience with her body, heart, and soul and is enthralled by the immensity of this time. At the end, she lies down on her back and sees that the stars are all looking at her. The night becomes a place of freedom, of becoming who Janine felt she could fully be, a time in which she found the space of liberation that the daytime never allowed her to have. Janine’s experience is the experience of so many whose lives are frustrated, incomplete, unnoticed, and not fully lived. It is also at night that people with “unruly” sexualities can find a certain kind of fullness, away from the gaze of hatred and prejudice of those who cannot deal with the freedom of persons who dare to challenge the social norms and to be who they fully are. At night, alone, pastors can be their full selves, with all their imperfections and limitations. At night, serious people can become clowns and play. At night, we enter into an expansive fluidity, a queerness of the Spirit, and ponder the fullness of life. At night, we can also find the time we all need for rest and renewal. At night, we have visions and witness apparitions. There is strangeness. The walls that separate reality and fiction erode, and we enter into places and realities we cannot control, with fictions that are more real than the real. Specters of other forms of rationality decompose our knowledges and notions of self. We find a part of ourselves that we are drawn to, fearful of: Madness! We see what we do not like or want. We are taken without permission to places we must visit. The night is filled with dreams and nightmares. In our dreams we are told of the past and the future and of a present presented to us in codes, images, sequences that we cannot create when we are conscious. At night, our unconscious shows us what we are made of and to what we are really paying attention without realizing or knowing it. Davi Kopenawa, an Indigenous Yanomami shaman in the Amazon, says that we white people—and by “white people” he means all of us who are not Indigenous—are so full of ourselves that we cannot think of nature as being a part of us, or of ourselves as belonging to the earth. He says that our lungs are filled with smoke because we cannot see much beyond ourselves. He adds, “Whites do not dream far like we do. They sleep a lot, but they only dream about themselves. ” 184 The earth is so far removed from our conscious and unconscious realities, so far from what truly matters to us, that trees and seeds, fish and waters, mountains and meadows are never a part of our humanity. Only now, haunted by a terrifying virus, might we be visited by dreams of ghostly creatures devouring our world. We cannot deal with the darkness of our world because we cannot deal with the darkness of our own lives. We, creatures of the light and darkness, are turning everything into darkness, destabilizing the balance and movement between light and darkness. Religions have always dwelled on light and darkness. Many religions have night prayers. Hinduism has the Hour of God, where meditation or yoga has to be done before sunrise. The Buddha’s enlightenment is said to have occurred between 2: 00 and 4: 00 a.m. In Islam, the Hour of God is called Tahajjud, the “Night Prayer.” Some forms of Judaism have the Tikkun Chatzot, the “Midnight Repair.” 185 Christianity has Jesus praying to God in the middle of the night in the Garden of Gethsemane and the night prayer of monastic communities. The night hours are the prime time for many forms of awakening and for an enhanced ability to see. To pray with the night is to find the courage to venture into darkness unknown so that we can find the luminosity of our darkness, the darkness of the world and the darkness of ourselves. The world has created too many lights to distract us from the night, the night of ourselves and the nights of others who are suffering. Marc Ellis speaks of the ways the prophet wrestles with light in a way that gives us a sense of the complexity of the relation between light and darkness: The deeper grasp, that entry into history, the ability to see suffering and hope, to gather light in the darkness. To hold it all together. This is the prophet’s task... Gathering light... In the darkness. Not from it. Not to announce light, which is too easy. Just seeing glimpses. Witnessing to the possibility of light. Horizon light. 186 It is this deep wrestling with the light and darkness that makes the individual and collective prophet’s light shine. If we are faithful to our abyss in fullness and like the prophet who “refuses to be an abyss voyeur,” we might be able to find this luminous darkness. 187 We Christians I wonder how many Christians have learned to enter into the night or have walked deeply in the night. Our spirituality as Christians has not helped us to deal with either darkness or the night. Of the world. Of ourselves. We hide, we run, we cover, we become oblivious. Some of us might refer to John of the Cross and the dark night of the soul, 188 but very few of us can linger intentionally in the darkness. Liturgically we have Lent: we delve into darkness with the somber ritual reminding us that we come from ashes and that to ashes we shall return. I always wonder how these forty days of shadows and darkness are lived by some Christian churches. The most I hear from people is about refraining from eating chocolate or drinking Diet Coke. I wonder about the practices of fasting, walks into the night, drawing near the darkness. We seem to go from Ash Wednesday to Easter Sunday too quickly, not plunging more deeply into the Triduum itself. We do not go deeply into the night of Holy Saturday; we do not take much time to stop and be still. We move too quickly to the lights of Easter. We do not pay much attention to the winter solstice, the longest night of the year. Instead, we cannot wait to light the next candle of Advent, anticipating the light of Christ who makes all darkness disappear. As for Christmas, we have cleansed the story from all of its darkness and messiness. We do not talk much about the dark night of Mary and Joseph. They were on their own, refugees away from home and without solace. They held fears of childbirth without any help or support. We do not talk about the lack of a place for them to stay or the smelly manger in which they finally stopped for shelter. We do not comment much on the story that when Jesus was born, he was surrounded by animals, the first to greet him, the first to love him. We do not dwell on the fearsome, lonely nights Mary and Joseph and Jesus lived. We make it all romantic, filled with lights. We rob the precious darkness from the story because we cannot bear to live without light. Some Christian monks and nuns pray the Night Office, a regular prayer in the deep hours of the night. A monk writes of this prayer: There is a freshness of spirit, an emptiness of mind, a depth of heart, which we don’t have during the day. The structure of the Night Office: singing the Psalms, listening to the readings, praying in silence, allows one to remain a long time recollected without any notable effort and to continue the “prayer of the heart.” The Night Office always began after midnight and lasts for about two hours. This was incomparably the best time for being with God. 189 Perhaps we need a God of darkness as much as a God of light. Unless we are able to venture into the darkness of the world, of ourselves and in the darkness of forests, we will never be able to see to the luminous darkness of our soul, of the earth, and of God. Without this thick darkness in the heart of life we are disconnected from nature and ourselves. Until we move from thinking that darkness must be something to get rid of and move away from and not something to which and in which we belong, our sermons will have too much superficial lights and very little truth. A Buddhist friend said to me: “I am tired of Christians, especially Protestants, who want to be a lamp on the hill all the time. They are so entrenched in their own light that they can’t listen to their own darkness and the darkness of the world.” We come from darkness and to darkness we shall return. We need to rediscover that while we are alive. Part of the work in our spiritual journey must be to disassociate darkness from sin, from ignorance, from hell, from fear, from pain and suffering. It must also be to disconnect darkness from Black people, brown people, LGBTQIA folks, Indigenous people, and foreigners. Christians need to gain a renewed understanding of darkness as part of their spirituality. Our connection to God is there to be discovered. Unless we give ourselves to the darkness, we will never be able to deal with a world without borders. Without the darkness of the unknown, we cannot reach the safety of what we imagine we know. Without the darkness within, we will never see the light. Without the darkness of God, we cannot see the light of Jesus. My Own Darkness The Christian faith has a great darkness running beneath it. In both the Jewish and the Christian faiths, we view the earth starting in darkness and light coming out of darkness only afterwards. The story of the birth of Jesus is filled with darkness. Jesus’s time in the desert is filled with darkness. His ministry is filled with darkness. He goes into deep darkness at the end of his life. Without darkness we cannot understand this faith. That is why I had such a hard time understanding faith in years past. I was caught into a binary where God’s light was the necessary denial of darkness. I grew up afraid of anything that took life out of order. The absurd, that which we cannot explain, took possession of me and I started to live under the fear of all forms of the absurd: going blind, becoming quadriplegic, getting a chronic illness, losing a loved one, traveling, doing something wrong, saying something out of order, making a mistake, doing something unforgivable, getting locked in an airplane or an elevator. I lived through a soundtrack of fears until I realized that I could not hide my sunshine from my own darkness. It was and has been a long journey to learn about my fears and why they are there and to begin speaking to them until they disappear, until the one who fears inside of me does not fear anymore. When I turned fifty, this long work on myself started to bear fruit. After years of therapy and prayer and meditation, looking deep inside, I started to learn more about myself. Becoming a father made me realize that unless I know myself, I cannot know my children. As I write this, my son has begun to ask me what would happen if he became deaf or blind. This reminded me of my eight-year-old self asking this same question but with nobody to answer it. I finally could respond to my own self as a little boy by responding to my son. I asked him how he would feel about it and he said he would be really sad. I agreed with him and said that yes, it could be very frightening. I added that we have to find a way to keep going, right? Later I showed him videos about Hellen Keller and how she was able to live her life fully as a person who was blind and deaf. My son said, “She had such bad luck!” and I replied, “This is life too.” The fullness of life (John 10: 10 ) is not only the good things but about everything we call life. Everything is a part of it, the good, the bad and everything between these too. There are ways to find gratitude in everything. Our darkness can be our light! Our light has to be able to see the lights of other religious traditions, of other people and allow oneself to be enlightened by other lights and other forms of light. The Christian light we carry is not the only light in the world. 190 The light of Jesus shines upon spaces for us to see other forms of light, life, resistance, and awareness. And the best way to learn how to deal with our darkness and our light is to learn from people who have lived under the shadow of death into the longest night. Cornel West says that in the face of adversity, Black folks respond with style, smile, freedom, compassion, courage, and laughter. 191 To respond to catastrophic histories and events and to the darkness of the world, we have to delve into our luminous darkness, where we have the style, freedom, and potency that keep us all going through the night. 168. Thurman, Luminous Darkness, xvii–xviii. 169. Psalm 139: 11 – 12. 170. Casaldáliga, “Na minha idade.” 171. This chapter was originally created to be spoken to a group of pastors. 172. Mbembe, Sair da Grande Noite, 33. 173. Rosales, Antología, 283. 174. Raymo, cited in Taylor, Learning to Walk in the Dark, loc. 1, Kindle. 175. Gospel of Mary 5: 7, in King, Gospel of Mary of Magdala, 15. 176. Strand, “Bring On the Dark.” 177. DeGuzmán, Buenas Noches, American Culture, loc. 22, Kindle. 178. A coyote is a person who smuggles migrants, usually over the Mexican border. 179. García, Handbook to Luck, quoted in DeGuzmán, Buenas Noches, American Culture, 1. 180. Carpentier, De lo real maravilloso americano. 181. See Alexander, The New Jim Crow. 182. Baldwin, “Open Letter to My Sister.” 183. Camus, Exile and the Kingdom, 3 – 26. 184. Kopenawa, Ends of the World, locs. 2112 – 16, Kindle. 185. Strand, Waking Up to the Dark, loc. 15, Kindle. 186. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 17. 187. Ellis, Finding Our Voice, 23. 188. John of the Cross, Dark Night of the Soul. 189. Strand, Waking Up to the Dark, 15. 190. See chapter 7 in this book, “Praying with the People of Axé: An Interreligious Dialogue.” 191. West, interview on The Laura Flanders Show, June 9, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHsHhj 32 9 T 4. EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 12/2/2025 2:49:54 PM UTC via MEADVILLE LOMBARD THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.