1 KNOWING DIFFERENCE OR WE'RE ALL DIVERSE HERE In this chapter, I explore some models for thinking about diversity and human difference, with particular attention to how those models inform psy- chotherapists' understanding of trauma. I also begin the process of looking closely at what it means that each psychotherapist represents something cul- turally meaningful to her or his clients as clients do to their psychotherapists, and these representations affect the process and outcome of psychothera- pists' therapeutic work. During my time on the faculty of a doctoral program in clinical psy- chology I took the lead in teaching a course with the well-meaning and be- nign-sounding name "Assessment and Treatment of Diverse Populations." When I took over the class on my arrival on campus and looked through the syllabus prepared by the prior instructor, I was unsurprised to find that this had been a class focused on rules for treating members of specific North American groups of people of color and other so-called minority groups; there was 1 week for African Americans; 1 week for Asian Americans; 1 week for lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people; and so on. This model, referred to in the introduction to this volume as the etic strategy for understanding difference, has been so prevalent in psychology's 23 discourse about cultural competence, difference, and diversity that I would be unsurprised if many psychotherapists picking up this book expected to find just that approach. The epistemologies of diversity in psychology have, until recently, been about deviance from an unspoken norm, the one in which "even the rat was White," to use Guthrie's (1976) not-quite-humorous words and in which a generic male human was seen to cover the experiences of all humans, including those who, unlike males, could and frequently did men- struate and give birth (Weisstein, 1970). If one becomes deeply immersed in knowledge of a particular culture it may be possible to parlay the etic model into culturally competent trauma work in that culture alone. Psychotherapists who are intimately familiar with the norms, customs, languages, spiritual traditions, and histories of particular American Indian nations may be extremely well equipped to work with American Indians from those nations as clients. Trauma has been ubiquitous in the lives of this community, although there are large enough cultural and historical variations from nation to nation that deeply knowing Nez Pierce history does not mean deeply knowing Duwamish history or Dine history or Cherokee history, despite common themes of genocide and forced reloca- tion. But even the most culturally steeped American Indian psychotherapist may not know what to do when the trauma for a particular client is one that happens outside the very broad parameters of the many and common trau- mas of this community. If, for instance, the client is a two-spirit person who has been gay bashed by other tribal members, the psychotherapist may not have all of the epistemic foundations necessary with which to assist the cli- ent in recovery with that particular form of within-group oppressive trauma. What I have found useful in making sense of human diversity and people's multiple identities within that diversity is a model first proposed by psychologist Pamela Hays (2001, 2007). Hays invited her readers to see them- selves and their clients through an intersecting web of what I refer to as "social locations" or "social identifiers." I define these as components of iden- tity that are constructed in the context of social, interpersonal, and rela- tional realities and that commonly inform the development of identity. Hays developed an acronym, ADDRESSING, for her epistemic system; this stands for age, disability (acquired and/or developmental), religion, ethnicity, social class, sexual orientation, indigenous heritage, national origin, and gender/sex. Along with her acronym Hays proposed a series of strategies for devel- oping culturally competent practice no matter whom psychotherapists are treating. A point that she made and that seems particularly germane to work- ing with trauma survivors is that knowing the histories of cultures and societ- ies, not simply the histories of the individuals with whom psychotherapists work, is a foundation of culturally competent practice. Understanding that social locations, the places in the social network where people are interper- sonally situated, develop within a particular historical period and are also the 24 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY inheritors of other historical periods, allows for careful, critical examination of psychotherapists' assumptions about each of these potential components of identity. Many of these histories contain deeply embedded experience of trauma that go on to be the lens through which members of these cultures encode today's experiences. Inter- and transgenerational transmission of trau- matic experiences cannot be well understood unless the histories that cre- ated those experiences are part of a psychotherapist's understandings of the world. I often add to Hays's list, which she described as foundational but not all inclusive, such other social locations as vocational and recreational choices, being (or not) partnered, being (or not) a parent, attractiveness, body size and shape, state of physical health (different from disability), phenotype (similar to ethnicity in some instances, but not isomorphic with it), and experiences of colonization (which frequently but not always overlap with indigenous heri- tage in the Hays model). Readers are likely to have awareness of other social locations that neither Hays nor I have identified, and I encourage readers to consider including them in their understanding of themselves and their cli- ents. ADDRESSING is useful because it invites psychotherapists to think broadly about the locations of diverse experience in each human. Each person, client and psychotherapist alike, will have some relation- ship to most if not all of these social locations, and many of these locations will form core components of identity. Bias, oppression, and stereotype can be leveled at people on the basis of any one of these social locations; thus each person will have either been a target of such bias, will have practiced such a bias, and/or, as a result of being a target, will have internalized bias into identity. If a person has not her- or himself had such experiences, the experiences may have happened in the history of family and culture and may have left their psychological and relational traces. The presence of bias in- terwoven into the experience of social location in the context of social and cultural histories informs the meanings that those locations have for people's identities. This interweave of history, culture, trauma and identity also cre- ates specific vulnerabilities as well as resistances to the experiences of trauma in the present day. It is important to explore each of these factors in greater depth and to begin the process of seeing where and how an enhanced com- prehension of those factors can facilitate culturally competent, culturally sen- sitive, and culturally aware trauma treatment. The discussions in this chap- ter are introductory, and each topic explored here is addressed in great depth later in this volume. A BRIEF WORD ABOUT TERMINOLOGY A preliminary word about terminology to be used here and later in this volume to refer to groups of people who are usually referred to as minorities is KNOWING DIFFERENCE 25 helpful in understanding this discussion. I have come to eschew the use of the term minority group for a number of reasons having to do both with the message given to people by being called minority (e.g., perhaps less than) as well as the inaccuracy of the term (some minorities are now or are about to become numerical majorities). Rather, I refer to target groups and dominant groups. Target groups are those social groups that have historically or continue currently to be targets of discrimination, bias, oppression, and maltreatment. Dominant groups con- stitute those social groups currently defined as the norm within a given cul- ture. Thus, in the United States today, dominant groups include U.S.-born, English-speaking persons of European descent who are biologically male, heterosexual, affiliated however loosely or historically with some variety of Protestant Christian faith, married with children, middle-class, aged 25-49, with a college education or more, no current disabilities, not fat, normative in their gender expression, and adhering to conventional standards of attrac- tiveness. Target groups constitute all others. Most persons have some mix- ture of target and dominant group status; even a person who today is entirely in the dominant group may move out of it as a result of aging beyond 49, acquiring a disability, losing his income and becoming poor, marrying a per- son of a target ethnicity, or converting to a non-Christian faith, to describe some very common trajectories for changes to social status. Movement among and between dominant and target social locations and finding ways to share both within one skin are other aspects of how identity develops. Understand- ing people's dominant and target statuses can emerge through exploration and examination of the most common categories of social location. I also use the term social location as a broad concept that refers to a variety of different types of experience that can affect identity. The AD- DRESSING model, for instance, lists many of the social locations that most commonly affect a person's sense of self as well as the ways in which others may respond to them. Even though some social locations have a biological component (e.g., gender, which is based in biological sex), all of them are to some degree or another socially constructed and variable from culture to culture. Although this terminology may be unfamiliar to some readers, my hope is that by using it I am inviting readers to reconfigure how they think about identity so that they eventually understand that it entails far more than a person's current or easily visible categories in the world. ENTERING THE ADDRESSING MODEL To understand how the ADDRESSING model can inform a psychother- apist's work, it is useful to explore in-depth each of the social locations iden- tified by that model. This discussion will begin to interweave the topic of trauma into each ADDRESSING variable. 26 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY Age Age is a social location with two components: one's actual age, which speaks to issues of developmental capacities, tasks, and needs, and one's age cohort, which informs the cultural contexts and norms surrounding one's life experiences. One's actual age is also a risk factor for certain kinds of bias; both children and older adults are targets of ageism, and because ageism is internalized, persons in adolescence and young adulthood frequently are af- fected by that internalized bias regarding their presumed future status as older people. To practice culturally competent trauma therapies, it is essential to understand the age (or ages, in the case of long-lasting trauma processes) at which trauma has happened and consequently to apprehend what develop- mental tools were available to the person for response to the trauma. The impact of trauma on succeeding developmental processes is also understood through the lens of age, because data suggest that traumagenic interference with one set of tasks affects, if not entirely inhibits, the successful accom- plishment of other later developmental tasks. A very useful decision rule about age and severity of trauma impact is that younger persons are those most likely to experience longest term and most pervasive consequences of trauma exposure; this contradicts the common sense belief that the very young are very resilient and adaptable in the face of trauma and the very old are more vulnerable and reflects the reality that the foundational developmen- tal tasks of childhood are more easily disrupted by trauma than are those of later life. I return to this topic and its ramifications for trauma therapy later in this volume. Disability As Olkin (1999) noted, it can be difficult to strictly define what consti- tutes a disability. She suggested that psychologists consider two continua, one of health and one of disability, which intersect in a variety of ways. Thus disability refers to changes and challenges to function at the level of the body that interfere with certain functions of life. Some conditions could disable an individual in some circumstances but not in others. Take severe myopia, for example. I am writing this sentence while looking through the lenses of my glasses. I am profoundly myopic and cannot see clearly much further than the end of my nose without those lenses; I have not been able to do so since about age 6. Living in a society that has developed corrective lenses means that I am not disabled from any function by my myopia, and I would not describe it as a disability. However, for an individual living in a pre- corrective-lens society this condition might be disabling and even life threat- ening, because my uncorrected eyes cannot tell what is lurking just down the road or looming beneath my feet. Some disabilities come with few or no effects on general health. For example, a person may be deaf as a result of the failure of the auditory nerve KNOWING DIFFERENCE 27 to develop during gestation but may otherwise be in excellent health. A person might, however, be deaf because she or he had meningitis that dam- aged the auditory nerve and that has had various other long-lasting health consequences. A person might be born with spastic quadriplegia due to cere- bral palsy and have quite severe disabilities of use of language and motor control arising from oxygen deprivation during the labor and delivery pro- cess; health problems that emerge for this person are not inherent in her or his condition but rather in the psychosocial consequences of having diffi- culty with voluntary movement and relying on others to move one's body so as to avoid decubitus sores from pressure. Olkin (1999) has suggested looking to issues of function and the effects of a condition on a range of functions, noting that it is useful not to think of a "disabled person," but rather "a person disabled from" with the functions specified by a particular condition. A person might be disabled from reading by neurological difficulties, by visual difficulties, or by posttraumatic anxiety but not disabled from walking, speaking, hearing, or engaging in daily self- care functions, for example. Thus, an individual born without disabilities may as a result of cardiovascular disease become disabled from walking or cognitively impaired in later life. A person who suffers traumatic brain injury after adolescence or a war veteran who experiences traumatic limb amputa- tion in combat has acquired a condition that can be disabling. Acquiring disability later in life can be traumagenic for some individuals. Disability as a social location has both developmental and acquired components. Developmental disabilities as defined by Hays (2001, 2007) are those that develop in utero or very early in life so that they are long-lasting and core components of an individual's experience. Acquired disabilities can loosely be defined as those that occur or develop far enough into the life cycle that they are experienced or perceived as a change to the person. Thus, neuromuscular disorders that express themselves in childhood such as mus- cular dystrophy would be developmental, whereas a similar set of symptoms of muscular weakness arising in adulthood as the result of myasthenia gravis would be classified as acquired. There is an important interaction of this social location with the previ- ous one, age. The presence of a developmental disability informs a person's encounters with normative developmental tasks; the acquisition of a disabil- ity later in life informs the use of formerly acquired skills and may uncover the presence of tasks of emotional and cognitive development that were less than adequately accomplished. Because of the impact of both medical tech- nologies and also the legal system on the lives of people who are on the high end of the continuum of disability, age cohort is also an extremely meaning- ful signifier in the lives of people with disabilities. Disability is also a social construct. One can see this in the lives of people who identify as culturally Deaf (using the capital letter D to denote this cultural identification). Such persons do not see themselves as having a 28 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY disability despite the fact that the inability to hear is so defined by the larger culture. Rather, they define themselves as an oppressed linguistic minority who, like other oppressed groups, have been forced until recently to learn the language of the majority culture rather than their own (Padden &. Humphries, 1988). The spirited protests held by some students and faculty during the mid-1980s at Gallaudet University illustrate this defining process, with the protestors insisting that this unique university of Deaf culture have a presi- dent who was Deaf as well. Deafness is a physical condition defined as a disability in most laws, and persons who are deaf and those who are Deaf may request accommodations from schools and employers such as provision of sign language interpreter services under those laws. However, many Deaf people do not personally identify as having a dis- ability and define themselves as occupying a cultural location that must be defended from incursions by the larger dominant hearing world. This, too, is a function of social factors other than the ability or not to hear; age cohort as well as family history of deafness plays a large part in whether a person who does not hear self-defines as having a disability. A deaf child born to and raised by hearing parents is more likely to be defined by self and family as a person with a disability. A deaf child born to the deaf children of deaf par- ents, as a third generation "Deaf of Deaf (to use the term from the Deaf community for those deaf by heritage as well as sensory capacities), is likely to see her- or himself as a person with a different language and culture, not a person with a disability. I join with Olkin (1999) and Hays (2001, 2007) to suggest that cultur- ally competent therapy with people with disabilities and their families re- quires what Olkin refers to as a "minority" rather than a "deficit" model. What is true is that people with disabilities have some (or several) aspects of their bodies that function differently than those of a majority of other hu- mans. Frequently, however, the challenges for these individuals lie not in those physical differences but in the barriers created to fullest possible func- tion by cultural institutions and practice. Ableism, bias against persons with disabilities, is pervasive, and because most people with disabilities do not come from families in which the parents are also people with disabilities, children with developmental disabilities almost always grow up in social en- vironments distorted by ableist bias. Trauma enters the issue of disability in a host of ways. Because of the risks inherent in applying a deficit versus a minority model, psychotherapists must be careful not to assume that the presence of the disability is itself trau- matizing or stressful. This is especially true for people whose disabilities are developmental and for whom this way of being in their bodies is well-known and not associated with abrupt loss or change. Harriet McBryde Johnson (2005), an attorney, memoirist, and disabilities rights activist, exemplified this stance in her memoir Too Late to Die Young: Nearly True Tales From a Life (2005). Although her neuromuscular condition is progressive and has KNOWING DIFFERENCE 29 increasingly disabled her from using her legs and hands as she has grown older, her relationship with her body is one of deep familiarity. She knows that she is a person with a disability, but that is not a source of trauma to her; her stresses come from the barriers erected by others to her pursuit of her life. Her story stands in contrast to those of individuals who are disabled by events or conditions that were inherently traumatic or a source of loss: acci- dents leading to paraplegia or quadriplegia or life-threatening illnesses such as cancer or multiple sclerosis. Such persons, prior to loss of their able-bodied status, may have held strong, even if not conscious, biases about the lives of people living with disabilities, and these biases now inform their understand- ing of the events that led to a change in function. Thus they may conflate being a person with a disability that made its appearance in the middle of their nondisabled life and life narrative and experience that entire change as traumatic. Finally, as I discuss in further detail later in this volume, being a person with a disability can be a risk factor for some kinds of trauma exposure. The manner in which a particular trauma attacks a person at the location of dis- ability and those aspects of identity affected by disability will both inform the experience of trauma. They will also shape that which may be useful in the healing process. Religion and Spirituality Religion and spirituality are the next social locations in the Hays (2001, 2007) model. Even atheists have a belief system; although they may balk at calling it a spiritual system, it will be one that allows for the making of mean- ing. All traumatic stressors are assaults on meaning-making systems, and most traumas will have lasting transformative impacts on the survivor's ways of making meaning. There is a pervasive interaction between trauma and issues of meaning making, with religion being equally a source of trauma, a loca- tion at which trauma is directed, and a source of coping in the aftermath of trauma. Culturally competent practice necessitates inquiry into and compre- hension of a survivor's religious, spiritual, and existential systems currently and prior to and during the trauma. Changes across time arising from trauma exposure and recovery are common, and the meanings ascribed to those changes by a trauma survivor will often become central to understanding some of that survivor's coping strategies in the face of trauma. It is also im- portant for psychotherapists not to conflate religious identification with spiri- tuality and existential meaning-making systems. Although for some people these are isomorphic, for many others they are completely separate, as is the case for the person who attends a Methodist church with his family on holi- days and the occasional Sunday but describes his spirituality as being about his relationship to nature. 30 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY Some religious affiliations constitute target groups; which groups are targeted depends on history and context. For example, although the Mor- mon Church is currently a large, successful religious denomination, its found- ing history is full of stories of hate crimes perpetrated on the founders of the church by dominant culture Protestant Christians. In Utah today where Mormons constitute the dominant religious and cultural group and the nu- merical and political majority there continues to be a consciousness of target group status in the group's early history. Similarly, an individual raised in a cultural context in which her or his faith is dominant may develop religious target group status when she or he moves from that context into one in which her or his faith is no longer dominant; this is a common aspect of immigra- tion to the United States from countries where Islam, Buddhism, or Hindu- ism are the dominant faiths, for example. The trauma of having one's faith marginalized can lead to distress that sometimes does not appear to be psy- chological but represents what happens when anxiety leads to rigidification of previously more fluid coping strategies. Ethnicity and Culture Ethnicity, the next factor in the Hays (2001, 2008) model, subsumes several factors. Ethnicity is commonly used in North American discourse to refer to persons of color, as in the phrase ethnic minorities. Hays asserts, and I concur, that ethnicity is not the same as phenotype. Phenotype refers to biology, the physical characteristics such as eye color and shape, hair color and texture, skin pigmentation, and so on, which are used as place markers for the construct of race, a concept that is then conflated with ethnicity. Ethnicity, however, is an intersection of a multiplicity of factors that include phenotype, culture, and language. Many Euro-American individuals are un- aware that they have an ethnicity because they conflate that term with phe- notype and may find a question about that topic confusing when coming from a psychotherapist. They may answer, "I'm White. I don't have an ethnicity." It can be helpful to give examples: One can be a "hyphenated" American of some sort (Armenian-American, Irish-American, or Norwe- gian-American); one can be of indigenous Euro-American ethnicity (South- erner or Northeasterner); or as one of my students phrased it, one can be "Heinz 57. A mutt," denoting a mixed and hybrid ethnicity of European descent whose distal origins have been lost in transmission over time. A person's cultural identification, ethnicity, phenotype, and ancestry may not be isomorphic. Some fourth and fifth generation Americans of Japa- nese and Chinese descent are disidentified with their parents' and grandpar- ents' cultures of origin. Statistics indicate that members of these groups are very likely to marry Euro-Americans rather than phenotypically similar per- sons and to identify culturally with Euro-American dominant culture. "I'm a White guy whose great-grandparents came from Japan" is the self-description KNOWING DIFFERENCE 31 of an acquaintance who although phenotypically Asian appearing and with a Japanese last name has no identification with any Asian culture, speaks no Japanese, and describes himself as fully assimilated into the Euro-American culture of which his spouse is a member. Thus, ethnicity is a many faceted phenomenon containing a range of potentially traumagenic experiences that evolve out of family history and personal experience. Persons of non-European phenotypes and some of East- ern or Southern European phenotypes have been the targets of racist bias both historically and currently. Individuals who identify with ethnicities that are primarily defined by phenotype (e.g., race) may experience exposure to racism even when they are phenotypically more similar to the Euro-Ameri- can dominant group. Consider, for example, Walter White, the famous Afri- can American activist who had fair skin and hair yet clearly was targeted by and affected by White racism. Ethnicity has also been a source of other sorts of trauma exposures that may be unknown to the client because assimilation was a family response to trauma, but whose effects have been transmitted intergenerationally. Public figures such as former Secretary of State Madeline Albright and former U.S. Senator George Allen are two recent examples of offspring of Holocaust sur- vivors who had no knowledge of their parents' Jewish origins until those histories were exposed to them in their middle adulthoods. In each case the family had used assimilation and religious conversion as self-protective strat- egies so that dynamics related to trauma in the family's history were buried and unavailable for understanding by either of these individuals. Historical trauma, easier to identify in groups in which such trauma is relatively recent, is also present in the lives of most of the large immigrant groups who came to North America prior to the imposition of immigration quotas. Although the potato famine of Ireland that engendered the large immigration of Irish people to North America is 2 centuries past, the experi- ences of colonization and conquest by the English, the banning of indig- enous Gaelic language, the disenfranchisement of the Roman Catholic reli- gion, and other aspects of Irish historical trauma that preceded the famine are all components of Irish cultural identity that may be detectable in clients of Irish descent even when, at the point she or he enters therapy, that client's understanding of her or his ethnicity is consciously limited to her or his rela- tionship to St. Patrick's day celebrations. Social Class Social class is the great invisible social location in the United States. Although national statistics increasingly point to growing income disparities between the richest Americans and all others and some social commentators speak of the disappearance of the middle class due to diminished availability of well-paying jobs outside of the learned professions, most Americans who 32 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY are not abjectly poor are likely to describe themselves as being middle class. Classism, the bias against poor people as well as against those who work with their hands, is pervasive in American culture in which an analysis of class issues has rarely been a component of the public discourse. Social class is also a complex variable. It may or may not reflect actual income level; some commentators on class have noted that middle-class sta- tus reflects the presence of social capital, defined in part by such factors as availability of literature in the home, parental or other close familial educa- tion, and a value placed on education for its own sake, even when financial means are absent or strained. A person of great wealth may have little or no social capital. Additionally, in North America barriers between classes are permeable, with social class not marked by accent, as is the case in Europe, or hereditary participation in a landed aristocracy (although informal aristocra- cies of wealthy visible families have long existed in the upper classes of U.S. society and now can be seen to form through families of celebrity). A person may live in many different social classes during her or his lifetime, with trauma sometimes being a factor contributing to loss of class status. Social class is conflated with several other social locations. Persons with disabilities are more likely to be very poor, with some estimates being that 80% of people with disabilities are un- or underemployed as a result of sys- temic barriers to participation. For instance, a person with disabilities and a doctorate in psychology who requires multiple medications and the use of a wheelchair for mobility and also has a personal care attendant may be unable to find a job that both pays sufficiently to have a high quality of life and also provides adequate health insurance coverage; she or he can only afford ac- cess to necessary care if she or he remains on disability income payments, which then creates needs-based eligibility for that care. If she or he does find work that pays more than $700 monthly, she or he places all benefits in jeopardy (Panzarino, 1994). Additionally, if this person uses paratransit ser- vices to go to and from a job, she or he risks being terminated for repeated tardiness because a common complaint of persons who use paratransit sys- tems is that they are rarely on time, sometimes being as many as several hours behind schedule. All of these factors can conspire in the life of a per- son with a disability to leave her or him impoverished no matter what her or his educational level, talents, or capacities. This person may thus be middle class in values and social capital but financially poverty stricken. Age also interacts with social class. Very young children are more likely to live in poverty than any other group of Americans. In the past, older age was also associated with poverty, and this continues to be the case for many aging women and aging people of color. In those instances earlier discrimination in the workplace created a cascading effect from lack of financial resources earlier in life leading to reduced savings for retire- ment and smaller Social Security payments as a result of lower paying work. However, with the inception of so-called welfare reform in the 1990s, chil- KNOWING DIFFERENCE 33 dren in the United States are more likely to be living far below the poverty level than ever before. Trauma interacts in a variety of ways with social class. Access to and expectations of care and safety are enhanced for middle-, upper-middle-, and upper-class persons. As I describe later, certain types of traumatic experi- ences, because they are more inconsistent with the lives and expectations of middle- and upper-class persons, are potentially more likely to be emotion- ally challenging for these individuals. Social class also directly affects the sorts of services and resources available to trauma survivors including insur- ance coverage for health and psychological services. Poverty creates risks for exposure to certain kinds of traumatic stressors including, given the all- volunteer nature of the U.S. military, combat trauma exposure. Sexual Orientation Sexual orientation describes the direction and expression of an indivi- dual's sexual and romantic desires. It is conceptualized on two continua, one of other-sex attraction and one of same-sex attraction (realizing, of course, that there are actually more than two sexes but that the other sexes generally sort into malelike and femalelike categories that allow the use of this con- tinuum paradigm for sexual orientation). Each human being is to some de- gree high, medium, or low on each of these continua. Persons who self-iden- tify as heterosexual are commonly higher on the other-sex attraction continuum; persons who self-identify as lesbian or gay are commonly higher on the same-sex attraction continuum; and self-identified bisexual indi- viduals fall at roughly similar places on both continua. Persons' expressed sexual behavior is commonly, although not always, indicative of their de- sires; persons with strong same-sex and weak other-sex attraction may en- gage in sexual and romantic relationships with members of the other sex and not necessarily identify as lesbian or gay, for example. Not all of these rela- tionships reflect some kind of suppression of true sexual self or self-hatred; they can also be about a strong relational connection with one particular other-sex individual. Each person has a sexual orientation; for some individuals this is fixed throughout the lifetime, as appears to be true for most gay and heterosexual men. For others, including some lesbian and heterosexual women and some bisexual women and men, sexual orientation is experienced as more fluid. The best available data suggest that the origins of sexual orientation are poorly understood for persons of all orientations but that attempts to change orien- tation, the direction of desire, in individuals for whom this is not already to some degree fluid are generally unsuccessful and may be harmful to those persons. A discussion of the issue of sexual orientation conversion, or repara- tive therapies, is beyond the scope of this chapter but is addressed as a trauma 34 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY risk factor in greater detail when sexual orientation issues in trauma are more fully discussed later in this book. People who are lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) are targeted by heterosexism (the systemic privileging of heterosexual ways of being and re- lating) and homophobia (fear and hatred of persons believed to be LGB) and are subject to a variety of forms of legal and attitudinal bias and discrimina- tion. Currently most states in the United States ban marriages between mem- bers of the same sex; although same-sex sexual behavior is no longer criminalized in the United States, it was until quite recently. Persons who are LGB are forbidden to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces if their sexual orienta- tion becomes known under the infamous "Don't ask don't tell" policy. (Read- ers might find it ironic that Israel, officially a theocracy, recognizes same-sex marriages from other countries, which the United States does not, and allows openly LGB people to serve in the military. Israel also makes survivor pen- sions available to the partners of those who serve, who are also likely to have been military veterans.) There are 17 U.S. states that have laws forbidding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in housing, employment, and public accommodations, but this means that the majority of states do not have such laws. Some states, most notably Virginia, do not even allow gay people to make nonmarital legal contracts such as medical powers of attorney for use in emergencies regarding their domestic partnerships. Sexual orientation interacts with all other social location variables, both those already discussed and those to follow. Briefly, for purposes of this chap- ter, what is important in terms of beginning to approach culturally compe- tent trauma treatment is for psychotherapists never to assume the sexual orientation of clients, regardless of such apparently obvious cues as the pres- ence of an other-sex spouse or same-sex partner. Routine inquires into how a person self-identifies are an important part of conveying to clients that a psychotherapist is open to however they describe themselves. Psychothera- pists who have personal difficulty with individuals of a given sexual orienta- tion and have been unable to work through that aspect of countertransfer- ence should refer clients to other psychotherapists, as the risk of harm to clients from a psychotherapist's homophobia, biphobia, or negativity about heterosexuality can be great. An aspect of sexual orientation that is rarely considered is that of what its practitioners refer to as kinky sex. This includes individuals who, along with attractions to persons of a particular sex or sexes, are aroused by such activities as bondage and discipline, the infliction or receipt of pain, various forms of role-playing involving dominance and submission, sexual behavior in relatively public settings known as play parties, or sex involving fetishistic elements such as clothing of particular fabrics (leather, rubber, vinyl, and velvet appearing to be among the most common). Sexually kinky individu- als are gay, lesbian, bisexual, and heterosexual. Some have multiple partners for purposes of sexual activity; some will be monogamous with one partner; KNOWING DIFFERENCE 35 and still others may be polyamorous (or poly), with committed relationships to more than one person that are not open to sexual activities with others outside the sexual partnership. Although there are estimates available regarding the numbers of LGB persons in the U.S. adult population (generally ranging from 3% to 10% depending on how these counts are made), no data exist regarding sexually kinky individuals. Working with this group of persons requires a particular degree of cultural competence that includes a high level of open-mindedness about sexual activities of consenting adults. Again, as is true with a client of any sexual orientation, psychotherapists who have poorly contained countertransferences toward kinky sexuality should consider referring cli- ents to other psychotherapists. Trauma intersects with sexual orientation in a large number of ways, and not all of these are related to a client's membership in a sexual minority. For example, sexual assault of heterosexual women by male acquaintances and spouses is related to the risk factor of being heterosexual and female and thus in close relational proximity to the group of humans most likely to com- mit sexual assaults. For LGB people, however, trauma of some sort is a con- stant; working with LGB clients thus requires knowledge of both LGB issues and trauma in its many guises. Indigenous Heritage and Colonization Indigenous heritage refers to people first known to be dwelling in a loca- tion prior to its colonization. In the United States, this includes American Indians, Alaska Natives and Inuits, Native Hawaiians, and Samoans (this definition begs the question of whether these individuals were themselves colonizers of other now-vanished groups). World-wide indigenous people include Africans from formerly colonized countries, the indigenous dwellers of Taiwan who were colonized first by the Han Chinese and then by the Japanese, the Ainu of Japan, aboriginal peoples of Australia, and the Karen and Hmong peoples of Southeast Asia. Some settings also have semi- indigenous groups, originally European colonists who were then themselves secondarily colonized by ultimate conquerors such as Acadians in Louisiana, Spanish Americans and mixed-race Mexicans in the part of Spanish America that became California, Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, all of whom expe- rienced secondary colonization by English speakers. What persons of indigenous heritage all have in common is a history of colonization by a group that invaded and stole land; imposed a different lan- guage, religion, customs, and ways of dress; often enslaved people for use in labor to produce trade goods; and frequently committed actual genocide. To say that trauma is an ever-present component of the lives and heritage of indigenous peoples is a great understatement. Historical, intergenerational, and present-day interpersonal trauma, called post-colonial trauma syndrome 36 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY by some, are common in the lives of indigenous individuals (Duran, Duran, Brave Heart, & Yellow Horse-Davis, 1998). Poverty is commonly associated with indigenous status; the poorest place in the United States is the Pine Ridge reservation, the rural ghetto of the Lakota people. But most other so- cial location variables cut across indigenous status as well. National Origin, Immigration, and Refugee Status National origin reflects the issue of immigration. Except for those people indigenous to North America, all Euro-Americans and Asian Americans and many African Americans living here are descendants of immigrants or them- selves immigrants (differentiated from the experiences of people of African descent who if descended from slaves were not immigrants but rather victims of kidnap and enslavement). Each succeeding wave of immigrants has been greeted with hostility; the anti-Irish sign festooning New York City in the 1820s contained sentiments not unlike the anti-immigrant slogans being preached today by the vigilante groups who troll for undocumented people crossing the U.S. border with Mexico. But the meaning of immigration has changed over time as well. When my Jewish grandparents fled their native Poland in the early 1900s they knew with certainty that they would never return, because Poland was an unsafe place for Jews. My partner's maternal great-grandfather who hid in a ship com- ing from Hamburg after running away from his home somewhere in the Austro- Hungarian Empire had a similar expectation of no return, although the issue was not as much one of safety. Immigration in the preairplane world was mostly a permanent phenomenon that had loss embedded deeply into its fabric. Many of today's voluntary immigrants often come to the United States with the reasonable expectation of visiting home and extended family again once this is financially feasible. The losses of immigration still exist for vol- untary and legal immigrants, but their configuration is different. More like the immigrants of the past are refugees fleeing unsafe places in their home- lands; my dentist, a Baha'i born in Iran, cannot return home so long as the present government, which has criminalized her faith, is in power, despite Iran's being the place where the Baha'i faith was founded. Refugees thus have the usual losses of the immigration experience today but are also likely to carry with them specific experiences of trauma and danger that impelled their departure from their homeland. Persons who are undocumented also bear more resemblance in their experiences of immigration to those of ear- lier generations than to legal immigrants of today in terms of danger and risk associated with the immigration experience. African Americans present a special experience of national origin. Per- sons of African descent whose ancestors came to the United States before the slave trade was banned in the early 1800s are all the descendants of those who survived the brutal Middle Passage of the slave trade. Although many KNOWING DIFFERENCE