also have Euro-American and American Indian ancestors as a result of sexual assaults and intermarriages and thus can be both indigenous and immigrant in their heritage as well, being transported to this continent in chains is a very different migration experience even than coming voluntarily as an in- dentured servant who shared phenotype and legal status with the master. Similar to the experiences of these persons are modern-day people who are trafficked into the United States and other industrialized nations for pur- poses of low-paid work or the sex trade. Trafficked people are in essence enslaved and come to the United States as a result of trickery or because they have been sold to pay a family debt. The meaning of migration for these individuals is not that of the voluntary immigrant, legal or otherwise. Cultural competence around issues of national origin requires psycho- therapists to consider carefully the various meanings of immigration and migration to their own and their clients' identities and then to explore how and where those experiences have engendered encounters with trauma. As is becoming clear, immigration intersects with every other social location; even persons of indigenous heritage in one place may become immigrants to an- other place, bringing with them their particular histories of living in their colonized countries of origin. Gender and Sex The final social location described by Hays (2001, 2008) is, ironically, the one that is generally primary in people's identities—gender. Gender is not sex. Sex is a term that describes the biological makeup of the body. As noted earlier, persons may be one of several sexes, with external genital mor- phology that matches or varies from chromosomal makeup or reproductive organs. One in 2,000 live births is of a person who is intersexed, meaning that the infant in question has genitals that are either ambiguous or inconsis- tent with reproductive and/or chromosomal sex. Generally, however, indi- viduals in the United States regardless of actual sex are sorted into the two categories of male and female (the issue of intersex is addressed at greater length later in this volume). Gender is the social construct built on the sex of the body. It is a series of schemata and roles that are both internalized and enacted and that begin to be imposed on children from almost the first moment at which the sex of a fetus is determined. Because of the very early imposition of rules regarding appropriate gender expression, gender is frequently phenomenologically ex- perienced as isomorphic with sex and gender expressions as hardwired in the anatomy of the body. This position appears to be largely mythological, with careful meta-analysis of the sex difference literature determining that effect sizes for almost all sex differences are small and insignificant (Hyde, 2005). Gender, no matter its origins, is quite a powerful determiner of identity and is generally the first identity that a person experiences, usually emerging 3 8 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY with clarity for a child between ages 18 months and 3 years. Developmental capacities for greater and lesser flexibility of categories and less and more critical thought about rules frequently govern the gender expression of younger humans, particularly very young children. Younger individuals are thus quite rigid about gender roles and rules. Gender interacts with every other social location, because no matter what a person's social locations, that person has a gender. Individuals whose preferred gender expression is at variance with that to which they have been assigned on the basis of sex are defined as transgender. Transgender itself operates on several continua, which may or may not in- clude the desire to surgically or hormonally modify the body to bring it into line with gender expression. Overtly transgender individuals are frequently mistaken for being gay or lesbian, given stereotypes of cross-gender expres- sion in sexual minority persons; however, transgender individuals come in the range of sexual orientations, which may or may not remain constant if and when a person has sexual reassignment surgeries. Cultural competence in psychotherapy requires psychotherapists to have an awareness of their own gender schemata and the rules that they impose on the gender expressions of others. Gender nonconformity is a frequent risk factor for trauma exposure; however, what is less well understood is that par- ticularly rigid forms of gender conformity also risk trauma exposure as well. Gender expression additionally appears to mediate response to trauma expo- sure, and posttraumatic symptoms are frequently expressed in manners re- flecting an interaction with gendered ways of being in the world already uti- lized by a trauma survivor. REPRESENTATION AND PRIVILEGE IN CULTURALLY COMPETENT PRACTICE As noted previously, I have added several other possible social loca- tions for consideration in the development of cultural competence for my- self; each psychotherapist will, in deepening cultural competence, find social locations in her- or himself and her or his clients that enhance understand- ing of identity and its relationship to trauma. Culturally competent practice involves the psychotherapist's awareness of her or his own personal relation- ships to each of these variables of social location. Because of the manners in which trauma differentially impacts each of these social locations and their various intersections, a particular component of identity will have itself been a source of personal trauma or distress for many persons. Psychotherapists must also be aware that their various social locations, particularly those eas- ily apparent to clients, will also have meanings that will color the therapy relationship. What psychotherapists represent to their clients and what cli- ents represent to their psychotherapists through the lenses of their collective KNOWING DIFFERENCE 39 multiple identities affect therapy profoundly. The ability of psychotherapists to be aware of those issues of representation is core to cultural competence in practice. The 19th century African American suffrage activist Anna Julia Cooper said, "When and where I enter, then and there the whole race enters with me" (quoted in Giddings, 1996, p. 13). Cooper's statement is true for each psychotherapist and each client. When and where psychotherapists enter the exchange of therapy, into the room with them marches their personal and cultural histories. They will represent things to their clients and their clients to them. This, I suggest, is more than simply issues of transference or countertransference, because the things psychotherapists represent are fre- quently alive and well in the social environments in which psychotherapists and their clients live and are not simply past experiences that are symboli- cally or unconsciously evoked or transferred into the therapeutic environ- ment. These dynamics, even when symbolic, are not merely nonconscious representations of personal history; they are the interpersonal and political realities in which therapy takes place. Culturally competent practice with trauma survivors or others requires a heightened awareness of what it is psychotherapists represent and what is represented to them. Culturally competent practice requires the sophisti- cated capacity to know when the dynamic in the room is about the psychotherapist's social locations, when it is about other representations, and when it is within the set of more usually considered dynamics of therapy as understood by the psychotherapist's particular theoretical orientation. This is especially the case when one or the other person represents a component of personal or historical trauma to the other. A basic assumption of culturally competent practice is that psycho- therapists can never and should not assume the trust of their clients. Trauma is itself destructive to trust; survivors of interpersonal trauma may take years to believe that psychotherapists will not become one of their perpetrators. Psychotherapists working with trauma survivors represent humans who were the source of trauma; psychotherapists' specific social locations and identi- ties may enhance or decrease their overall role as a threat stimulus. As sev- eral of my clients have told me, it is only because my dog, who works with me, appeared to trust me that they then decided to accelerate their own process and view my actions as more likely to be truly benign rather than a trick designed to pull them closer to me so I could harm them further. When certain kinds of difference are present, psychotherapists' clients will have even more reasons founded in experience and reality to view their psychotherapists with suspicion and uncertainty, not to believe that their psychotherapists' professional training trumps their life training as biased humans. In fact, for many members of target groups the mental health disci- plines have been a source of pathologizing and disempowerment, making psychotherapists less worthy of trust than some other types of healers. When 40 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY psychotherapists represent current or historical trauma to their clients and are aware of it, however, they increase the possibility of earning trust when they tell the truth about their acceptance of their role as representative of their culture. Acknowledging and validating the presence and stinky leav- ings of historical elephants in the therapy office can communicate to clients that psychotherapists are willing to tell truths that are uncomfortable for them as psychotherapists and not simply to invite their clients to experience their own discomfort. I return to this theme repeatedly throughout this vol- ume as I explore the specific ways in which representation affects the therapy process in trauma treatment. Cultural competence also requires attention to the phenomenon of dominant group privilege. Privilege is the collection of unearned advan- tages attendant on being a member of a dominant cultural group. There are usually corresponding undeserved disadvantages conferred on members of target groups. Some examples of how privilege manifests itself include the following: • You can drive any car you want without worrying that you will be stopped so long as you are obeying traffic laws. • You can marry the person you love and receive survivor ben- efits if they die first. • You can walk into any store wearing anything you want pretty well assured that you will not be followed or harassed. • You believe that if you are the victim of a crime that you can call the police and be helped by them. • Your culture's holidays are always days off from work or school. • You can be imperfect and few people will generalize from your imperfections to those of everyone in your group. • You can swear or dress in second hand clothes or not answer letters without having people attribute these choices to the bad morals, the poverty, or the illiteracy of your group. • If your day, week, or year is going badly, you need not ask in each negative episode or situation whether it has overtones of bias or whether you're being paranoid. (Mclntosh, 1998) Privilege lends power to one's biases; if I am a lesbian biased against heterosexual people, I may suffer from being prejudiced but I lack the social power to declare all marriage between other-sexed persons illegal. The het- erosexual person biased against me has the privilege and power to legislate against me. Acknowledging one's privilege can be a trust-engendering and relationship-building action in therapy. Ignoring it or pretending that it does not matter will eventually undermine trust and endanger the working alli- ance of therapy. When I sit across the room from persons of African descent, they can- not know that my ancestors arrived in this country in 1919, nor does it tnat- KNOWING DIFFERENCE 41 ter whether I personally benefited from slavery. What they know, and I must also know and be able to acknowledge, is that I have benefited from the unearned privilege associated with my phenotype of European-appearing skin and that they, in turn, have experienced undeserved social disadvantage as- sociated with their phenotype of darker skin than mine. I know that my grandfather, who came off the boat in 1919 speaking no English, found work as a carpenter in Cleveland more easily because of the color of his skin than did a similarly experienced African American carpenter born and raised in the city to which my grandfather came. 1 also know that when he built his home in a middle-class suburb in the 1950s no one questioned his right to be there. When the first two African American families tried to build their homes in that same suburb in the same time frame, their applications were held up for years by a zoning board raising one petty question after another. A carpenter with a seventh-grade educa- tion designed and built that first home; an architect with a master's degree in his subject designed, built, and finally was able to live in that second home with his daughter, who became the first African American girl in my scout troupe but not until the city did everything it could to make him and his family feel unwelcome. If I cannot find a way to convey to my African Ameri- can client that I know this truth about the realities of phenotype privilege, she or he has no reason to go past a certain point of vulnerability with me because I will not have communicated an awareness of the power of my so- cial location of privilege. Other groups—heterosexual persons, middle- and upper-class persons, those not yet disabled, and so on—also benefit from unearned privilege and, when engaged in the intimate exchange of psychotherapy, will bring the effects of that privilege into the dynamics of the relationship. Privilege can protect against distress in the face of trauma, or it can be a factor leading to distress; disadvantage can instill resilience that is protective, or it can create vulnerabilities that spread the effects of a trauma exposure beyond their ini- tial impact. The dynamics of power and powerlessness arising from privilege intertwine with trauma, and when they are treated as nonexistent, they will impinge on therapy for trauma survivors. Not yet being a survivor of trauma is, after all, very much a form of privilege that is unearned; being able to keep one's survivor status private and avoid the shame associated with disclosure, something that redounds to the role of the psychotherapist within the usual boundaries of the process, is also a form of privilege, associated as it is with the power of the psychotherapist's role. Privilege is not a reason for guilt on the part of the dominant group psychotherapist. Individuals are not responsible for having inherited un- earned privilege. I did not choose my phenotype or know the unearned advantages it would give me. In fact, guilt from privileged persons about their privilege invariably becomes an additional burden for the disadvan- taged others, who then often feel compelled to do the work of reassuring 42 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY dominant group members that they are not a bad, oppressive individuals, and become deflected from their own agendas. Rather, psychotherapists with some dominant group membership (and it is difficult to have none; the heterosexual Christian married-male African American has one set of privileges stemming from the first four social locations in his identity; I, a lesbian Jewish cannot-get-legally-married female Euro-American have a different set of privileges stemming from the last of my listed social loca- tions) need to commit to personal work to become aware of their privilege and how it manifests in their worldviews and their work to achieve and maintain cultural competence. A component of that work is leaving guilt and shame behind. I have privilege; my job is to know how to live responsibly with that reality, not to deny it or pretend that I can jettison it. Similarly, psychotherapists with social disadvantage must become aware of the effects of internalized op- pression and exclusion on their psyches as they enter the relationship with clients who may have more access to privilege than they and notice how they or their clients may subtly disempower these psychotherapists as the dynamics of power and dominance from the larger society infiltrate the therapy office. As Mclntosh (1998) noted, any dominant group privilege, be it of gen- der, sexual orientation, ethnicity, social class, and so on, is generally operat- ing at a nonconscious level. It is the nature of privilege to make itself invis- ible to those benefiting from it but very visible to those who do not have it. Internalized oppression may be similarly invisible because it has become a part of the consciousness and sense of self of the oppressed individual (Pheterson, 1986), a negative ascription about one's own group that feels true because it has been reinforced in oppressive social contexts for so long. In each instance, the psychosocial impact of culturally based hierarchies will have a residence in the therapy room and, if not brought into awareness and consciousness by the psychotherapist, may be detrimental to an effective healing process. Add trauma to the mixture and the potentials for problems may increase because trauma is itself a factor disadvantaging a person and frequently one that undermines power and privilege in ways that are confus- ing to all parties. This perspective can be particularly important given that psychothera- pists frequently constitute the privileged persons in the therapy room, with the power of the therapeutic role outweighing privilege or disadvantage that might operate in the social world outside of therapy. Because therapy is an elite profession requiring in most cases postgraduate study and thus the luxury of time and financial resources and the capacities to navigate educational systems designed by and for the privileged, few psychotherapists do not come from dominant groups holding social privilege. When the psychotherapist is not a trauma survivor and the client is addressing issues of trauma, then dy- namics related to privilege will obtain even when all other aspects of social KNOWING DIFFERENCE 43 location are shared by client and psychotherapist. Ultimately, privilege is about unearned ease and the inequitable access to resources inherent in cer- tain kinds of personal and structural power. Because trauma is about disempowerment and the loss of safety and ease, a psychotherapist's aware- ness of power dynamics will strengthen the work with trauma survivors no matter what a psychotherapist's general orientation to treatment might be. Awareness of privilege and disadvantage become important components of knowing what one represents because the social locations that enter the room with a psychotherapist generally carry messages about the privilege or disad- vantage stemming from those markers of social realities. The psychotherapist working from a culturally competent standpoint takes the position of an ally. Allies are not advocates, nor does an alliance stance require a deviation from the frame of one's theory of psychotherapy (Mio & Rhoades, 2003). Rather, alliance is the stance of externalizing the problem that has been placed on the client's shoulders and making it a col- lective problem; specifically as relates to the issue of privilege, an alliance perspective places the primary responsibility for responding to issues evoked by a psychotherapist's dominant group privileges in the hands of the psycho- therapist. It is a stance of moral nonneutrality as regards the traumatic event, a stance that, as Ochberg (1988) pointed out long ago, is required in work with trauma survivors for whom moral neutrality is the functional equivalent of silently standing against the survivor. It is a stance of willingness to iden- tify and validate the realities of systems of oppression that operate in the lives of target group people who are also survivors of trauma (Dass-Brailford, 2006). This can be particularly crucial when working with trauma survivors who are a superordinate target group cutting across and through all other identities and social locations in part because of having been the targets of a traumatic event, rendering them members of a group stigmatized in Western cultures. Trauma is a feminizing event; trauma renders its targets weak, help- less, confused, and emotional, all characteristics that are associated with the target group of femininity. Many of the meaning-making systems of our cul- tures impute blame to the trauma survivor for what has happened; notice that even in the case of supposedly morally neutral natural disasters a dis- course of "why did they live there in the path of the tornado/flood/hurricane/ windstorm/earthquake fault" can be seen and heard in postdisaster public discourse. When the psychotherapist is her- or himself a trauma survivor, she or he is in the room not in that identity, holding the privilege of the psycho- therapist position. As a therapeutic ally, the culturally competent trauma psychotherapist acknowledges the presence of stigma in the room, attends to her or his inner pulls to assume the privilege of normalcy, (which is a charac- teristic almost always ascribed to members of the dominant group, even in those contexts not officially dedicated, as is indeed true in the psychothera- peutic context, to defining people as normal or abnormal), and tells the truth 44 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY to clients about the reality of their situations rather than attempting to mini- mize the experience of the trauma or failing to respect that the client has already made attempts to cope with its aftermaths. The culturally competent therapist contextualizes the experience of trauma in light of historical, sys- temic, and institutionalized dynamics of oppression and targeting, highlight- ing the interaction between trauma and those other phenomena in the client's experience of pain and of recovery. It can be helpful to differentiate clearly between privilege or its lack and trauma. All trauma strips privilege from people; not all disadvantage is traumatizing. Oppression, as I discuss later at length, is a risk factor for be- coming traumatized, with some writers arguing that all oppressive systems are inherently traumagenic. Nonetheless, oppressed people frequently also have available to them systems of resilience and coping that mitigate the traumagenic effects of oppression. Culturally competent therapists have the task of enlightening themselves and their clients about the complicated in- terrelationships between oppression, trauma, and resilience as well as be- tween privilege, trauma, and resilience. As I discuss later in this volume, there are times when privilege increases a person's risk of experiencing an event as traumatic. THE COMPETENT TRAUMA SURVIVOR Alliance with a client and cultural competence also reflect a compe- tency-based stance on clients (Bertolino & O'Hanlon, 2001). From this po- sition a psychotherapist strives to see the people with whom she or he works as having already been making numerous biological, psychological, psycho- social, and spiritual attempts to solve the problems engendered by trauma exposure. Gilfus (1999) referred to this stance as a "survivor-centered episte- mology," which she defined as "first and foremost the acknowledgment of the survivor as a complete human being with a cultural and historical con- text, capable of expert knowledge in her or his own right, to be viewed through the lens of a loving perception" (p. 1253). Some of these strategies for responding to the unbearable pains of trauma will have succeeded magnificently for varying periods of time; some will have succeeded poorly if at all. But all of these strategies are evidence of the survivor's intentions and desires to deal with what trauma invited into her or his life. The Vietnam veteran nurse with whom I worked in the 1980s began drinking to silence her nightmares and flashbacks. In alcohol she had a strat- egy that worked very well for a decade or so, then began to break down as her dose increased and interfered with her other life functions, and worked even less well as even the increased dose no longer kept her intrusive symptoms at bay (Brown, 1986). It is important to note that because active alcoholism is more stigmatized in women than in men, her coping strategy led to more KNOWING DIFFERENCE 45 social isolation and rejection from her family than similar behaviors might have for a man. However, she was not helpless or a failure, although she believed herself to be both when she began to work with me. She had been actively trying to cope with her distress for almost 2 decades and was mostly in need of a method that worked better and lasted longer so that she could recover from the trauma and pick up the pieces of her life left by her initial coping strategy. Just as generally culturally competent practice rests on re- spect for the diversity of ways in which humans inhabit life and the world, so culturally competent trauma practice respects and honors the diversity of attempts that trauma survivors have made to solve the problems of distress and disruption that trauma has brought into their lives. Some coping strategies will have worked not as well as wished for or lasted not very long. The heterosexual Euro-American man who was beaten in the parking garage at his office and then developed an unwillingness to leave home solved the problem of being in unsafe places by never leaving his safe home. However, he quickly replaced the problem of unsafe places with the problem of never being able to go to work. Because he was male in a culture that has no official social role for a man not working outside the home, his solution worked more poorly for him than it might have for a similarly traumatized woman, especially if she was heterosexual and married, two social locations that make it permissible for an adult not to work outside the home if she is female, but stigmatize that strategy for a man. Nonetheless, both of these people and every single trauma survivor that psychotherapists encounter in their work will have created some sort of self- help strategy: avoidance, dissociation, overwork, abuse of substances or food or exercise, prayer, art, petting the dog, giving birth, or being celibate. They have arrived at psychotherapists' offices alive, if sometimes only barely so. Frequently the strategies that they have used reflect one or more of their social locations, both at and after trauma exposure; some of their strategies will have been learned from other people residing in a shared traumatized context, be it familial or cultural. Some of the reasons that they will have come into therapy also reflect their social locations and the capacities of their emotional and psychosocial environments to support their strategies or not. A stance of alliance is one that recognizes psychotherapists' client's de- sires to problem solve buried in what are now symptoms of distress and dys- function and honors that problem-solving capacity in an overt and respect- ful manner as a component of the therapy process. Similar to Rogers's (1957) thesis that all humans are possessed of the drive to self-actualize, so I find useful the notion that humans have the will to solve the problems of their lives. As I discuss later, a component of culturally competent treatment for trauma involves exploring effective strategies developed not only by psycho- therapists but by other similar survivors who are often the best experts on what works. 46 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN TRAUMA THERAPY In summary, cultural competence in work with trauma involves two sets of knowledge and two sets of emotional skills that must then be skillfully combined into one set of strategies for understanding and interacting with those who seek psychotherapists' care. In the remainder of this volume I explore further how to think about diverse experiences and their relation- ship to trauma so as to deepen that combined set of skills in clinical practice. KNOWING DIFFERENCE