For Daily Reflection Rev. Tandi Rogers and Rev. Sue Phillips This ritual is a gentle, daily experience of shared reflection. It uses the same format and reflection materials for a whole week, so that the shape and substance of the experience have time to sink in for participants. Repetition is important because new meaning is revealed over time. The ritual invites each participant to enrich and explore their own spiritual life, evoking that which is beyond ourselves but to which we are connected by essence and aspiration. The authors originally designed this for their immediate family and have hosted what they call “family chapel” for both friends and complete strangers. Others have picked up the concept and made it their own as individuals, small groups in a retreat setting, online as a virtual pop-up community, and in religious communities. Materials □ Chalice □ Timer □ Short piece of music (preferably no more than four minutes) □ Short reading (preferably less than 125 words) □ Optional: Bell or chime Setup The sweeter and more intentional the environment the better, just for loveliness’s sake, but no formal setup is required! The authors enjoy using meditation cushions and floor chairs—something about sitting on the floor together is especially calming for them, but of course folks should just be as comfortable as possible. The authors have used the same space for this ritual for years, and the space has become part of the reflection experience, as they notice the light, sounds, and temperature changing with the seasons. Choose a reading and a piece of music that are meaningful to you. Consider using music with rich metaphors, evocative tunes, or contemplative words. Try to match the tone and content of the music with the reading so there’s some thematic integration. Do this ritual every day for a week, using the same music and reading each day. With fewer than five participants, it will last about half an hour; allow more time for more people. Script Opening Words Welcome to this time out of time to empty our hearts and minds. To let our spirits rest a bit together in the communal silence. In the music. In the reading. Let whatever rises rise. We will light our chalice, take a time of shared silence, hear some music, and listen to a reading twice. After the second reading, you are invited to share as you are inspired. Let’s take some thoughtful breaths and arrive. (Take a breath and wait a few seconds before continuing.) Chalice Lighting (Light the chalice or candle.) Shared Silence (Move right into three minutes of silence, ideally ringing a bell or using a timer with a lovely sound to mark the beginning and end of the time.) Music (Play the music the first time.) Reading, First Voice (The first reader names the author and title of the piece, then reads the reading slowly and intentionally. Allow 30–45 seconds of silence after they have finished.) Reading, Second Voice (The second reader reads the piece aloud, not repeating the author and title but with similar calm and intention.) Reflection (Ask simply, “What is rising for you in the meditation, reading, or music?” Be patient with silence. Leave time for each participant to speak, but also be content with someone choosing not to.) Blessing (Offer a brief blessing, prayer, or meditation, rooted in what you heard in the participants’ reflections. Try to use generous, expansive language so that as many people as possible see themselves reflected in what you say.) Music (Play the music for a second time.) Chalice Extinguishing (Extinguish the chalice. Linger for just a moment as the smoke clears.) Closing Words (Thank everyone for coming and wish them well.)