For the Days following a Natural Disaster Rev. Nathan Ryan and Rev. Steve J. Crump This ritual is for a congregational worship service immediately following a natural disaster. It was created for the Sunday after an unprecedented and catastrophic rainfall in Baton Rouge, La., in 2016 that flooded seventy church families. Materials □ Chalice Setup Just be in the space. It can be tempting to try and make something perfect after a major disaster. This is natural. When you can’t control the thing that has caused you and your community so much pain, it’s natural to try to control something else. Just remember that you can’t make things perfect or fix what has happened. All they need from you is to be with them; all they need from one another is to be together. Try to keep this service as simple as possible. Even though you may be looking for a ritual, remember that just being together is the ritual. Bear in mind that not everyone will be able to be with you. If you have a working phone signal or Internet connection, try to stream the service. If not, keep notes of what was said to send to members of the congregation who couldn’t get there. People usually want to fill this service with content—theorizing, sermonizing, educating, and other kinds of intellectual engagement. Don’t. People may not be ready for this type of engagement so soon. Be together. Sing. Share silence. Sing some more. Create just enough structure for people to have a space for their heartache. Also, try to have this service match the regular Sunday liturgy as closely as possible. People will want something that feels normal. Script Opening Words Come into this place. Come into this place that is safe. Come into this place as broken as you are right now. Bring in the truth that you are enough. Bring in the truth that you are safe here. Don’t leave your fears and worries at the door. Tell them they can sit next to you, but they should be quiet for this hour. Come into this space that is here for you—all of you. Come let us be together, a broken together people. Song (When this service was held after a rain event, the authors used “I Can See Clearly Now” by Johnny Nash for the first song. For a different type of natural disaster, consider a more relevant song that is hopeful and upbeat.) Chalice Lighting Take the long view. Know, not exactly how, but that we will get through. Take the long view. Know what you feel now. Know, also, that outlooks and feelings change anew. They do. Take the long view. Look around and know that we are not alone. Give and receive. Help and be helped. Breathe in and out. Take the long view. Know, not exactly how, but that we will get through. In that spirit we light this chalice. (Light the chalice.) Song “Winds Be Still” (Richard S. Kimball) (Lead participants in singing.) Reading That Voice (Steve J. Crump) When things go down or seem to fail or really fail, Or collapse, or seem to fall to pieces, or really do, Some things stay in the ditch and it’s best to leave them there. Pronounce them ditched. But maybe not all things. Not everything. A voice might tell you the difference. Some things we ought not try to fix, retrieve, or mend. A voice could tell us how to choose. Oh, there will be a clamoring for your attention. Some will say, “Hey, another door opens.” Many will say, “It all works out in the end.” And there are those pop song lyrics, “Time will heal,” and “This pain will make you stronger.” Job had his so-called comforters also. You wonder what Ozymandias would say, but he doesn’t call. When the comforters exit stage right, there remains a voice of a friend or your own solitary voice. Yes, that voice. If only folk would speak the truth of the matter: “This is the way life goes. Life is just as likely to be served up on a plate of absurdity as not.” There is a voice that speaks the truth, and that voice gets us home. Yes, that voice. Music (Play some reflective music designed to give people time to process.) Prayer God that we know when we see love and compassion, Be with us on this day. Hold all those aching hearts, all those afraid. Hold all those who lost their things. Hold all those who lost their safety. Hold all those who lost loved ones. Help us to know that no matter how hard things are, we are not alone. Help us to know that this is not your plan. Help us to look for you in the help, in the hope. Help us to transform this heartbreak. Help make us into beacons of hope. Help us use this tragedy to make this world more loving and more compassionate. Amen. Song “Filled with Loving Kindness” (traditional Buddhist meditation, words adapted by Mark W. Hayes, music by Ian W. Riddell) (Lead participants in singing.) Litany of Connection Please join in a litany of connection. After each line, respond by saying, “We are not alone.” No matter how afraid you are— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. L EADER: No matter how damaged you are— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. L EADER: Even with your fears and worries— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. L EADER: As you go into this uncertain world, back to your uncertain homes— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. L EADER: As you try to pick your life up again— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. L EADER: Go back into this world that isn’t fixed, isn’t ready, isn’t what we were promised. Go back into this world knowing that you carry with you a deep and holy truth— P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. Song “There Is More Love Somewhere” (African American spiritual) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing It is time to go back. It is time for us to leave this sanctuary. It is time for you to pick back up your fears and worries. They are not your enemy. They are reminders of what you might have lost, or what a world you might build could look like. It is time for you to bring some of this sanctuary back to your world. Go share your love. Go share your hope. Go out knowing that no matter what happens, You are not alone. (Extinguish the chalice.)