For Transgender Day of Remembrance Rev. Otto Concannon A ritual for Transgender Day of Remembrance, an annual day of mourning on or around November 20 which gives names to lives lost to anti-transgender violence around the world. Materials □ Altar □ Chalice □ List of names of those known to have been lost to anti-transgender violence in the past year □ Tea lights, one for each person named (you will need more than three hundred) □ Music □ Taper candles with drip guard, one for each participant □ Receptacle to collect taper candles □ Optional: Transgender pride flag Setup Expect an event like this to be attended by folks from outside of your community, many of whom may not be comfortable in a church setting. Be sure to have welcoming signage and helpers who can help people get oriented. They should give each person an unlit taper candle as they come in, and make sure guests know where there is a gender-neutral and accessible bathroom. Find a list of people known to have been killed in anti-transgender violence in the past year (October through September); one reliable source is Transrespect versus Transphobia Worldwide (transrespect.org), a research project initiated by Transgender Europe (TGEU). (On TvT’s list, “N.N.” means that the person’s name is not known.) Print out the list of names in large print and recruit seven to ten helpers to read them. Most of the people named will come from Latin American countries, so it’s helpful to have readers who can fluently pronounce Spanish and Portuguese names. If there are anonymous people on the list, instruct the readers to say “Name unknown” for each. Set up an altar, and place on it a lit tea light for every life lost to anti-transgender violence. Note that you will need a large altar, as you will have more than three hundred candles. You may wish to use a transgender pride flag as an altar cloth. The script given here assumes that the leader is not trans; if you are, change “they” to “we” as appropriate. Consider having a reception after the ritual. Especially for smaller gatherings, such an event can be a place for people to bring their tears and grief, a much-needed space for healing and connection. Script Music (Play soft gathering music as people enter the space.) Chalice Lighting Welcome to [name of space or community] for this service honoring Transgender Day of Remembrance. We will now light our chalice, marking the sacred space we will share. By the glow of the lights of those lost We light the flame of life that burned within each life we mourn today. May we find healing and connection here. May we be reminded that we are part of a larger movement Of souls and bodies Beautifully and wonderfully made Just like the lives we now mourn. May we find ourselves inextricably connected To the hope of a better world for all transgender people. (Light the chalice.) Song “There Is More Love Somewhere” (African American spiritual) (Lead participants in singing.) Reading or Reflection (You or someone else could offer a reading or short reflection here.) Introducing the Candles I’m [Name], the [role] here at [congregation’s name], and my pronouns are [pronouns]. I want to acknowledge how important this service is for our community. It is a time for us to pay our respects to those who have been killed by anti-transgender violence worldwide. Many who are killed by anti-transgender violence are not honored or remembered in a way that recognizes their full humanity, and so we come together every year to say these names, to give them the respect they deserve. Let the names we read remind us, as Mother Jones did, to “pray for the dead, and fight like hell for the living.” Behind me, there are [number] candles lit, one for each life lost to transgender violence this past year. In a moment, we will read the names, but first I would like to invite you to join in singing two verses of the song “Comfort Me.” You can sing, or hum, or just listen; whatever you like. Once we’ve sung twice through, we will begin reading the names of our beloved dead. Song “Comfort Me” (Mimi Bornstein-Doble) (Lead participants in singing.) Reading the Names (As the musician quietly plays the melody of “Comfort Me,” the helpers should begin reading the names, slowly and reverently. This section can take up to twenty minutes.) Prayer Spirit of Life, We are a people hurting and mourning our beloved siblings, Killed by anti-transgender violence. We know not what to do, holy one, Nor what is asked of us when we must bear witness to such horrible deaths. Spirit of Life, you know that it is hard to find hope in times like this. May love embrace us and all our transgender siblings the world over. Help us to remember that transgender people are whole and wonderful beings worthy of love and safety, joy and contentment. Spirit of Life, Hold in love all those who struggle with their gender identity, All those who struggle to know that they are loved, That they are worthy, And that we need their light burning brightly to guide us in this beautiful, terrible world. We say a prayer of compassion for all those who love the hundreds of names listed today. May they be comforted in their grief. And we say a prayer of justice Of hope That the killing of transgender people ends today. We recognize that each of these names represents a whole person, A person who loved, and lived, and struggled, and laughed, just like all of us. We know that this violence impacts each of us differently, And tonight we lift up especially transgender women of color, who are so much more often the targets of such violence. May we be reminded of the resilience that transgender people have shown throughout history, And may we be reminded in these difficult times of that resilience: Of those who will not be erased, Who will not be silent, Who exist and will continue to exist until the end of time, Wholly and beautifully made. And, finally, may these lives be remembered for what they brought to our world. Blessed be, and amen. Lighting Candles for Those Present The solemn and sacred task of Transgender Day of Remembrance is to mourn and remember those who have died in the holy act of simply being who they are, beautiful and beloved creations of God. It is right that we take time today for sadness and grief, that we recognize the fear that resides in all transgender people and those who love them, and that we honor the lives that were cut short by the scourge of transphobia in our world. But even amidst this mourning, we are reminded by our presence here today of the resilience of transgender people. We are reminded by those who live their lives as they are, whether out loud or in the quiet space in their hearts; we are reminded by all the beloved transgender people in this room and the power they hold; we are reminded by those who love transgender people, and those who loved those who have gone from this world. We know that transgender people aren’t going away; they will not be silenced or erased. They are part of the masterpiece that is the human experience. The resilience of transgender people must be honored and celebrated as well. And so, as a reminder of that resilience, and the power in this room of transgender people and those who love and have loved them, let us light our candles as we sing again together. If you didn’t get a candle as you came in, please raise your hand now and a helper will bring you one. Then accept the flame from your neighbor and pass it on to the next person. (Allow a few moments, if needed, for taper candles to be delivered. Then light a taper of your own from one of the tea lights and use it to light the tapers of a few participants. Offer guidance as needed as they light others’ in turn. When all candles are lit, invite participants to sing.) Song “Go Lifted Up” (Mortimer Barron) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing We will extinguish our chalice and the candles we are holding. But as we go forth into the world we still carry our light, our resilience, in the face of such sadness. Lift it high, and go in peace. (Extinguish the chalice and your taper candle.) You are welcome to leave as the music plays, or to stay as long as you like in the silence afterward. (Add an invitation to the reception, if you are having one.) Music (Reprise the tune of “Go Lifted Up.”)