For Separation or Divorce (for an Individual) Rev. Heather Concannon This ritual is for use by one person, alone, after the end of a marriage or other romantic relationship. It is written to be used flexibly at different points after the relationship’s end; it has a consistent beginning and closing, but may include different ritual elements intended to address different emotional or spiritual needs. At different points along the journey of separating from a partner and ending a relationship, individuals will need different things, and you may wish to revisit this ritual several times, using different elements as they feel right to you. Materials □ Altar space □ Chalice For grieving and releasing the relationship: □ Picture of the person from whom you have separated □ Journal (paper or digital) For removing a wedding ring: □ Your wedding ring □ Copy of your marriage vows (if you made them) □ Two pillar candles or tea lights □ Journal For expressing and releasing anger: □ Paper □ Fire pit or small fireproof bowl □ Bowl of water □ Hand towel For forgiveness: □ Dissolving paper cut into small pieces and a pen (or regular paper and a water-soluble marker) □ Bowl of water □ Spoon For imagining a new and different future: □ Plant pot and soil □ Seeds □ Strips of paper □ Water Setup The journey of processing, healing, and finding closure will be different for every person experiencing the end of a significant relationship. Each separation is as unique and personal as the relationship itself. Even so, most people will face several important emotional and spiritual tasks. Depending on where you are in your own journey of separation, you may choose any of the following ritual elements for your ritual. It is recommended to do only one or two ritual elements at a time, not all of them at once. You may want to repeat different versions of this ritual over a period of time after a major separation, breakup, or divorce to give yourself multiple opportunities to facilitate letting go, forgiveness, acceptance, or whatever it is you need. This ritual is meant to be done at home or in another quiet, comfortable place. Before you begin, clear your schedule and turn off your phone. You may wish to set up a small altar with items that represent the relationship, such as pictures or your wedding ring, to help mark the intention of the space and time you have created for yourself. Script Chalice Lighting (As you enter into the space, take a few grounding breaths and light your chalice.) My life looks different than I expected it to. It is okay to have all of the feelings I am having. I am loved and lovable. For Grieving and Releasing the Relationship (For some people it is difficult to accept that a relationship has ended; for others its end may bring feelings of relief and empowerment. Whatever you feel about the end of the relationship, this ritual element is designed to help you reflect on the relationship as a whole, to mark your transition out of it, and to help you release what it has been, so that you may begin to step into a new reality, one in which you are no longer partnered with the other person.) (Write a letter to the person with whom the relationship has ended, using the prompts below. Each one might spark a single sentence or a longer passage.) • Dear _____, • Since we met, you have been [name all the roles the person has played in your life]. • The things you, and our relationship, meant to me are _____. • The circumstances that affected our relationship are _____. • I am grateful to you and to our relationship for _____. • The things I wish to hold on to from our relationship are _____. • The things I will miss about our relationship are _____. • The things I will not miss about our relationship are _____. • The expectations or hopes for our relationship that I am letting go of are _____. • The feelings I wish to release about you and our relationship are _____. • When I think of you or see you in the future, I hope to feel _____. (When you have finished writing the letter, read it over. You may wish to read it out loud, imagining reading it to the other person.) For Removing a Wedding Ring (For many people who have used rings as a symbol of their relationship, it can be hard to know when and how to take the ring off, and the idea of doing so may bring up many feelings. This ritual element is intended to help facilitate that moment. Before beginning this ritual, consider what you plan to do with the ring after you have taken it off.) (Light two candles.) (If you made vows or other commitments with your former partner and can obtain copies of them, take them out now and read them. Consider: how does it feel to reread your vows? Which parts of them do you feel that you kept well? Which parts bring up feelings of regret, hurt, or tenderness? You may wish to journal on these reflections for several minutes.) (Take off your wedding ring and place it in front of one of the candles.) I release you from these vows. (Extinguish the candle behind the ring.) (As the second candle remains lit, take some time to journal about the following prompts: • What promises do you wish to make to yourself in the coming weeks and months? • What intentions do you hold around caring for yourself, self-talk, or making time and space for things that are important to you?) (After you are done journaling, read over these new commitments. When you are ready, extinguish the second candle.) For Expressing and Releasing Anger (After a separation, you may find yourself angry at the other person, at yourself, at circumstances that influenced the end of the relationship, or at others who may impose their feelings or reactions onto your separation. This is an opportunity to express anger and then release it.) (Take some time to express your anger on paper. You might do this in narrative form, by journaling, or by drawing, scribbling, writing down disparate words, folding, ripping, or tearing the paper, or in any other way you want to express your anger. You can use as many pieces of paper as you need.) (When you are ready, burn the paper in the fire pit or bowl.) (Take several slow, thoughtful breaths, waiting until the paper is completely burned.) I release this anger. (Dip your hands into the bowl of water and gently wash any soot, drawing materials, etc. from your hands, along with your anger. Dry your hands.) For Forgiveness (Forgiving another person is a gift to ourselves, even more than it is a gift to the other person. Forgiveness does not condone behaviors, nor is it the same as reconciliation, but it can be a powerful way to loosen the hold that resentment, regret, anger, and hurt can have on us.) (Call to mind a specific regret or hurt related to the end of your relationship that you would like to let go of. You may want to forgive the other person for words they said or for actions they took or failed to take, or you may want to forgive yourself for something. Try to be as specific as possible. Write out a description of the hurt on one of the pieces of dissolving paper.) (Take a cleansing breath.) (Consider for a moment how it would feel to have the burden of this regret or hurt lightened—not entirely lifted, but lighter. Notice how it feels in your body to imagine letting that go, forgiving yourself or the other person for this hurt.) (Once you are ready, gently drop the piece of paper into the bowl of water. You may wish to stir it into the water as you watch it disappear. Imagine your regret or hurt dissolving—not disappearing, but transforming—as the paper dissolves.) (Repeat with any other things you would like to forgive yourself or the other person for.) For Imagining a New and Different Future (The end of a major relationship means the end of a future that you had imagined or expected. You may have needed time to grieve this lost future, or you may have been ready for a new one for a long time. This ritual element is designed to come at a time when you feel ready to mark your openness to a new and different future.) (Fill a pot with soil. As you do so, think about all of the things in your life that have had to pass away and decompose, as compost does, to make space for and nourish new life.) (On strips of paper, write down some intentions, imaginings, or affirmations you wish to hold in the next chapter of your life.) (Roll up the pieces of paper into small coils. Make a small hole in the soil. Gently place one of your rolled-up intentions and three or four seeds in the hole and cover it with soil.) May you have what you need to thrive. (Repeat until you have planted all of your intentions. Plant them with hope and courage, knowing that some may grow and some may not. Water them.) Chalice Extinguishing (Once you have done one or two of the above elements and feel ready to end the ritual you have created for yourself, choose a way to close the space. You may wish to sit in silence or meditate for five or ten minutes, sing a simple song a few times, or offer a short prayer.) (Extinguish the chalice, and transition out of the ritual by doing a quiet and calm activity, such as making tea, taking a shower or a bath, petting an animal, or listening to soothing music.)