For Blessing a New Home Rev. Karen G. Johnston This ritual serves the purpose of marking and making a new home, wherever it is, whether the focus people rent or own it, whether they inhabit it alone or share it with others, and whatever form it takes: apartment, house, houseboat, co-op, group house, assisted living facility, etc. It is designed for individuals, couples, families, and groups committed to living together. The author developed this ritual through crowd-sourcing and in conversation with a family in her congregation. Materials □ Chalice □ Small containers of water, one for each participant □ Stones (3–8 inches long, preferably flat and smooth), one for each participant □ Permanent markers in colors that contrast with those of the stones □ Potted plant or two (if the ritual is taking place entirely indoors) □ Optional: Fans (handheld, not electric) Setup Review the script ahead of time with the focus people and personalize it as appropriate. They may want to gather or choose the stones that will be used. Encourage them to consider inviting family members, friends, neighbors (the ritual could be a way to meet them!), coworkers, and anyone who brings them delight. The stone ritual invites participants to move freely around, choosing a place for their stone; the focus people might want to communicate if there are areas that are off limits. This ritual can take place indoors, outdoors, or both, and you might want to invoke the four elements in the same place or in different rooms, corners of the yard, etc. Decide ahead of time which elements will be invoked in which spaces, and set up the materials needed in each space. Carry the lit chalice with you as you move around; you may prefer to use a hurricane lantern or a battery-operated candle. Script Opening Words (Sing or recite, alone or in unison with all participants, this excerpt adapted from “May Nothing Evil Cross This Door,” by Louis Untermeyer.) May nothing evil cross this door, and may ill fortune never pry about these windows; may the roar and rain go by. With laughter drown the raucous shout, and, though these sheltering walls are thin, may they be strong to keep hate out and hold love in. Let us begin in gratitude: for being together; for this body and this breath; for the joy of health in all its forms; for community that sustains us; for opportunities to be of service. To make a home is one of the most elemental acts we humans—and not only we humans—do. It is essential to our survival in both body and spirit. A shelter protects us from the elements. Yet when a shelter becomes a home it is a place where roots may hold us close and wings may set us free. [Names] have invited us into this sacred act of recognition and ritual to intentionally mark the process of making this their home [optionally add “and accepting responsibility for this land whose stewards they have become”]. Their inclusion of us affirms that it is in community We rise above mere existence or pure survival and find ourselves able to dance and dawdle, dazzle and dream, delight and dwell in Love. We live our lives in the midst of the four great elements. It is among these elements that [Names] make their home. Fire. Air. Earth. Water. We welcome them and invite gentle versions of them into our shared ritual today. Fire The Fire Element. (Light the chalice.) We kindle this chalice: a symbol of hope in hard times, a beacon of light in dark times, a sign of resistance against evil. We respect the element of fire not only for its power of light and life, but also for its power of destruction. May only flame that soothes, heals, regenerates, cooks, and illuminates, be known in this home. (Move to the next element’s location.) Air The Air Element. As our bodies allow, Let us take in a comfortable breath. This element reminds us that We do not escape our dependence upon the air that we and other living beings breathe. It is not just dependence, but interdependence: the very essence of this planet, our shared home. Using our hands [or the fans provided], Let us create the movement of air in our midst, directing it toward others and ourselves, a form of blessing to affirm that in making this place a home, We celebrate not self-reliance, but our unavoidable, luscious, generative interdependence. (Pause while participants bless the space with air.) (Move to the next element’s location.) Earth The Earth Element. These stones [name the focus people who collected them, if relevant] are our earth element. Forged through forces beyond our knowing and beyond our capacity to survive, they remind us of two truths: First: the making of a home, like the living of a life, can be rocky. The living of a life and the making of a home bring trial and tribulation, the texture of lives lived. And we encounter people and moments that make the journey smoother, reminders of our blessings, such as these stones aspire to be. Second: we long for, and to a large degree need, a solid foundation beneath us, and the opportunity to ground ourselves and each other. There is something powerful about touching the earth to remind us of whence we came; to help us connect with humility; to affirm our utter interconnectedness. Come up and take a stone and a pen. Answer this question in one word: What do you hope [Names] will find in their new home? Write the blessing on your stone. Once you have written your word on it, Find a place in this [home, yard] where it might reside, perhaps out in the open, perhaps hidden away as a future surprise. (Pause while participants write their blessings on the stones and place them.) (When everyone returns, move to the next element’s location.) Water The Water Element. (Invite participants to take a container of water.) These containers hold water, source of life, conveyor of blessing in many traditions. It is already holy in its essence, and we shall make it even more so, speaking aloud or silently an intention over or into it. What do you hope [Names] will create in their new home? Please now speak your intention into the water. (Pause while participants speak their blessings into the water.) Now take your container of water. Find a place to water the ground [or “Water one of these plants”], knowing that as you do so, you are adding your intention to this house to make it a home. (When everyone returns, move to the chalice.) Chalice Extinguishing Let us gather back together to bring this ritual to a close. “Though these sheltering walls are thin, may they be strong to keep hate out and hold love in.” Lyrics, once again, from the hymn with which we lit the chalice. As we started, so we end. With the words to a song that we offer as a prayer for this [family, person, group], this home, this nation, this world. And with gratitude: may it be in our hearts, on our minds, in our bodies as we move through space and as we rest, as we offer our gifts to the world. (Extinguish the chalice.)