For Mending a Broken Covenant Rev. Elizabeth Carrier-Ladd When a community or group of people have made a covenant together, agreeing on how they will treat each other and the work or play they do together, they must also bear in mind that the covenant may at some point be broken. People make mistakes, they have bad days, they behave poorly sometimes, they hurt each other. But the breaking need not be a total destruction. When a covenant is broken, we may be called to come back together, to mend it and start again. This ritual creates a container for a community to work through a breaking of their covenant, so that they can recommit themselves to it and to each other. It is grounded in restorative justice and the human possibility for transformation and redemption. Unitarian Universalism is a covenantal faith; rather than requiring members to hold a particular belief, it calls them into covenantal relationship with one another and the world. This ritual was created for a congregation’s youth group. It works best in smaller groups of five to fifteen people. The group must have a covenant that is explicit and shared, and it must have been clearly broken in a way that the group agrees has harmed the community. Materials □ Chalice □ Covenant, either posted for all to see or printed for each participant □ Easel, whiteboard, or chalkboard □ Extra chair that can be easily lifted and moved Setup The most important thing to do in preparing for this ritual is to talk with the person or people who have broken the covenant and invite them to apologize. The ritual is not a space to surprise someone with an accusation that they have broken the covenant; it presupposes that they have acknowledged doing so and have accepted the community’s call back into covenant. Encourage them to write out their apology in advance and help them to do so, as appropriate. Remember that a true apology includes four parts: the person must admit responsibility for what they did, express remorse for it, make amends as best they can, and plan how they will avoid making the same mistake again. You may wish to recruit helpers to read different parts of this ritual, so that it isn’t all in one voice. Arrange participants in a circle so that they can all see one another. Leave enough space in the middle for someone to stand or sit there, but do not place a chair there yet. Script Chalice Lighting Come, come. Be among us. Come, spirit of possibility. Come, human power for change. Come, accountability. Come, forgiveness. Come, kindreds, into this circle of care. All of us are welcome. All of us are beloved. All of us have fallen short, fallen flat on our faces, fallen into someone we care about and harmed them. Come, come, whoever you are. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words Covenants are not contracts. Covenants transcend agreements. They are made with the understanding that they will be broken. They are lofty ideals: vows we commit to do our absolute best to stay true to. And as humans, we accept the reality that we will not always be able to live up to all of them. And when we fall short of our goals, we do not give up. Because being in a covenantal community means being willing to keep trying. It means coming back and recommitting. Song “Come, Come, Whoever You Are” (Rumi and Lynn Adair Ungar) (Lead participants in singing. Ideally, use the descant “Though you’ve broken your vows a thousand times.”) Reading “I Want to Be with People” (Dana Worsnop) Often people say that they love coming to a place with so many like-minded people. I know just what they are getting at – and I know that they aren’t getting it quite right. I want to be in a community where I don’t have to think like everyone else to be eligible for salvation. I want to be with people who value compassion, justice, love, and truth, though they have different opinions about all sorts of things. I want to be with people of good heart, people who have many names and no name at all for God, who see in me goodness and dignity, who also see my failings and foibles, and who still love me. I want to be with people who feel their interconnection with all existence and let it guide their footfalls upon the earth, people who see life as a paradox and don’t rush to resolve it. who are willing to balance upon the tightrope that is life, who will help steady me when I wobble. who give of themselves, who share their hearts and minds and gifts. I want to be with people who let church call them into a different way of being in the world, people who support, encourage, and even challenge each other to more ethical living, who are willing to be uncomfortable trying to get there. who inspire one another to follow the call of the spirit, who covenant to be honest, engaged, and kind, who strive to keep their promises and hold me to the promises I make. I want to be with people who know that human community is usually warm and generous, often challenging and almost always a grand adventure. In short, I want to be with people like you. Naming of Impact Together, let us name the impact of our broken covenant. Each of us will have a moment to share from our own perspective, if we wish. Please focus on your feelings and experiences, using “I” statements. (You may want to speak first, to model appropriate sharing of impact. Be ready to help participants call one another back if they venture into generalizations or speaking for others. Allow time for all who wish to speak to do so.) Apology Covenants are aspirational. When we break them, we are called back in. We are called to return again. To take responsibility. To say we are sorry and that we will do better. We are all on a journey of growth and change—and we all make mistakes along the way. [If one or a few people clearly broke the covenant] [Names] have come to us prepared to make a statement to this community. May we listen with our hearts open. May the spirit of redemption and transformation be among us in this space. [If no individual or group is clearly responsible for the broken covenant] We have gathered to discuss and work through [describe the untenable dynamic or conflict]. We agree that this is harming the community. We will go around the circle and share any regrets or apologies that we may have about our part in the situation. One by one, as much as we can, we will name whatever we are responsible for that has contributed to this problem harming all of us. This naming does not have to be exhaustive. It does have to be genuine. May we all listen deeply to one another with our hearts open. May the spirit of redemption and transformation be among us in this space. (Invite someone to begin, and then go around the circle. Participants may pass if they choose.) Returning to Covenant As we return to this covenant, let us hear its words together. Let us read it aloud, in a circle, one line at a time. (Have participants read the written covenant. Allow them to pass if they choose.) And now, given what has transpired, let us consider what is needed for our covenant moving forward. Is there anything we need to add? Or change? (Take notes, or have a helper do so while you facilitate the conversation, on the posted covenant text and/or on the easel, whiteboard, or chalkboard, so that everyone can see what is being discussed and proposed. Move toward a new covenant through consensus. This may take time. Give it the time it needs. If you come to feel that consensus cannot be found in the time available, shift the topic and guide the group toward planning how and when to return to the work of building consensus.) If the group has succeeded in developing a revised covenant (Write out a clear copy of the revised text where everyone can see it.) What good work we have done! Let us read this new covenant together as a means of adopting it! (Have participants read the new covenant, going around the circle with each person reading one line as before. Allow them to pass if they choose.) If the group has not succeeded in developing a revised covenant (Write out, where everyone can see it, a clear copy of the plan that has been developed for how the group will continue the work.) Creating covenants takes time, and thought, and the willingness to work together. We haven’t finished crafting our new covenant—but we have covenanted to keep working on it. Let us all affirm our commitment to doing so. (Have participants affirm their commitment. You could have them repeat a line like “We will keep working together in good faith” after you, or you could state any concrete plans that have been made, such as “We will meet again on Wednesday night,” and have them agree aloud.) Affirmation Circle We have done good work today—let’s celebrate! (Lead some cheering.) We are all loved, precious beings. Whether we have been harmed directly or indirectly, and whether or not we have caused harm, we are all loved, precious beings. We are all deserving of care. We know that each of us holds real value in this community. We know that we are better together and that rebuilding trust will feel risky for us all. In a moment, I’ll invite each of you, one at a time, to come into the center of the circle. Friends on the outside of the circle, you will be invited to share words of affirmation with this beloved in our center. When you are in the center of the circle, please do your best to receive. Resist the urge to argue or second-guess the ways in which you have value. Just listen to the ways in which you have been a gift to this community. You can sit or stand, whatever you like. If you are comfortable with it, you can close your eyes when you’re there to focus on the words. (Move the extra chair into the center of the circle. Invite one person into the center at a time, and have the rest of the group share what they value and appreciate about them. Continue until everyone who wishes to has had a turn in the center.) Closing Words We are fragile humans. Being in relationship means that we will be hurt. Engaging in a community is a risk. No one can assure you that you will be completely safe when you interact with others. I assure you that if you truly engage with those around you, you will often be uncomfortable. We will all be hurt. We will be disappointed. We will push each other too far. We will misunderstand and be misunderstood. We will get angry. We will make mistakes and harm people we care about. This is part of what is so special and beautiful and hard about life in community. And it is so worth it. Belonging to a community who will support us in our joys and sorrows is priceless. By practicing our values together, we are becoming our best selves and strengthening this community that we hold so dear. By practicing accountability and forgiveness, by living into our covenant, we are living lives of transformation that transform the world. May it be so. Blessed be, and amen. Song “How Could Anyone” (Libby Roderick) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish this flame And we hold the light it represents in our hearts. We honor the spark of the divine in each one of us And we aspire to work toward a world where each spark is cherished. (Extinguish the chalice.)