For Separation or Divorce (for Both Partners) Arran Morton This ritual is for people who are ending their marriage or romantic partnership, but who want to continue their relationship in a new form. It is written for two partners but could be adapted for more, and offers ways to include and affirm their children, if desired. It is ideal for a smaller, intimate gathering. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Two taper candles □ Tea light □ Wedding rings (or other tokens that were exchanged at the wedding) □ Item symbolizing the relationship (such as a copy of the marriage certificate, wedding picture, handfasting rope, etc.) □ Fireproof bowl or cauldron containing a small amount of wood shavings or shredded paper (enough to ensure the symbolic object will burn completely, but small enough to keep the fire contained) □ Fire extinguisher or fire blanket Setup This ritual is ideally held in an outdoor, well-ventilated space, or a private residence where a small, contained fire can be lit without setting off fire alarms or sprinklers. Set up the altar table with the chalice, the bowl or cauldron, and any other nonflammable decorative items you would like. Place the two taper candles and the tea light on the table as well, but try to make them less visible. Light the tea light before the ritual starts. Keep a fire extinguisher or fire blanket nearby, just in case! Script Chalice Lighting I invite [Name 1], [Name 2], and [Children’s names] forward to light our chalice. In the spirit of love, we light our chalice To guide us through the difficult times To celebrate the good times And to honor our transitions. To acknowledge our community Who are by our side through it all. (Focus people light the chalice.) Opening Words Thank you for being here to support [Name 1] and [Name 2] today. As you know, we are here to witness and hold space for [Name 1] and [Name 2] as they end their marriage. They welcome each and every one of you. You have all supported them throughout their life together—many of you were at their wedding [number] years ago—and they hope you will continue to support them in this new stage of their lives. This is not a day of sorrow, though of course there is sadness and grief in every ending. This is a day in which [Name 1] and [Name 2] hold space for all that has been in their relationship, honor the gifts they have given to one another, let go of what was, and prepare to move forward in their lives. Though we will undoubtedly touch sorrow, and that is important, we will also share in the excitement of a new beginning, and most likely many other feelings! Releasing Vows [Number] years ago, [Name 1] and [Name 2] stood before you and asked you to recognize their relationship. To recognize them as a family and to support their journey together. They have appreciated your support when times have been difficult and they have delighted with you in joys both large and small. Their relationship began and has continued to be rooted in love and respect for one another. Over the last [number] years, their paths have been bound closely together. Their relationship, their family, and this community have shaped their lives. And for many years that has fed their growth and happiness. Now, after considerable reflection and exploration, they have come to realize their journey as a couple has come to an end. They have not taken this decision to separate lightly. Ultimately the love and respect for each other that brought them together are the same forces that now ask them to end their marriage and to forge new paths in the future. And, as they had their community here to witness and support them in joining their lives in marriage, they invite you to witness and support them in ending it. They have prepared some words to say to one another. (Invite the focus couple to come forward.) P ARTNER 1: [Name 2], I am grateful for the time we have had together, for the love and care you have given me and our family. I acknowledge that, sadly, our journey in marriage has come to an end, and here our paths diverge. In the spirit of love, I return the wedding ring you gave me, and with it I release you from the vows we made that day. You have my blessing, and I hope you find joy on the path before you. (Pause to acknowledge the moment before having the second partner repeat these words and return their ring. Pause again before continuing.) Releasing the Relationship You have released each other from the vows you made. Are you now ready to let go of your relationship as you have known it? Focus COUPLE: We are. L EADER: [Name 1] and [Name 2] have chosen [object] to symbolize their relationship. [You might explain why they chose it. Then address the couple again.] Will you please put the [object] in the bowl? They will now burn the [object]. (Each member of the couple picks up a taper candle and lights either the kindling or the symbolic object itself. After the fire is established, continue.) As the [object] burns, they release the energy they have invested in the relationship. Release the expectations they had of one another. Release the disappointments and frustrations. Release the daily intimacies and affections. Release the patterns and routines they created in their marriage together. (Wait until the flames die down.) [Name 1] and [Name 2] have separated their physical spaces, they have ended their legal contract through divorce, and today they end their marriage spiritually and symbolically. They close that chapter of their lives and begin to look forward to what is to come. Although they will, of course, need time apart to reimagine their lives moving forward, they will not need to leave all of their life together to do so. They are able to stay connected to each of you, their beloved community. They are both deeply committed to parenting [Children’s names]. And they are committed to continuing their friendship, which has sustained them through all the stages of their relationship. Optional Affirmation of Children Use this section if the couple have children who are willing and able to participate [Name 1] and [Name 2] are committed to remaining in healthy relationship with one another, honoring their past, and leaving space for their individual futures as their relationship evolves. They are committed to this, not only for their own well-being, but also for the well-being of their beloved children [Children’s names], who they know will be affected by this transition. (Ask the children to come forward.) Your parents would like to say something to you now. (The parents may write their own affirmation or use the words below.) P ARTNER 1: I am and always will be so proud of you and so grateful to have you in my life. I know that things will change now that your [name that children use for Partner 2] and I have chosen to separate, and I promise to support you in this transition. I will always love you. (Repeat for the other partner.) Affirmation of Community As they asked you [number] years ago to support their marriage, and you have done so, [Name 1] and [Name 2] now ask you again for your support. Your support for each of them individually to create new lives, and your support for them to enter a new phase of being a family: As friends and coparents committed to each other’s well-being and devoted to their children. Are you willing to offer this support? P ARTICIPANTS: We are. L EADER: May it be so! Before we close this ritual, I invite you to sing “Love Will Guide Us.” Song “Love Will Guide Us” (Sally Rogers) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing L EADER: We extinguish our chalice with the words of Lois Van Leer. Having let go, Set our intentions, Named our curiosity, Committed our energies, And given ourselves over to lives of balance, purpose, and meaning, Let us begin again In love. (Extinguish the chalice.)