For a Service Dog Partnership Rev. Joanna Lubkin Dedicated to Sully and the staff and volunteers of NEADS World Class Service Dogs The partnership between a disability service dog, guide dog, or hearing assistance dog and their human is a sacred relationship. Service animals are not pets; they are working dogs specifically trained to assist a person with a disability. However, there is a great deal of love and trust between the human and their dog, who is their constant companion and an integral part of them living as full and independent a life as possible. Many people wait years and fundraise extensively before being partnered with a service dog, and the match is an occasion for excitement, relief, and joy. This ritual is meant to celebrate the partnership, offer the human a chance to express their commitment to the dog, and offer a community a chance to bless the partnership. The author was matched with Service Dog Sully from NEADS in September 2021. Materials □ New dog toy □ Dog treat or small amount of dog food □ Service dog gear (e.g., vest, harness, or leash) or a ribbon Setup This ritual can be an element within a congregational worship service or a separate ritual attended by guests of the focus person. Either way, consult with the focus person (and their caregivers, if appropriate) about their needs and preferences for the ritual rather than making assumptions. Ensure that the vows they will make reflect the circumstances and responsibilities of the specific partnership between them and their service dog. Place the service dog and focus person somewhere that the assembled community can see well, either up front or in the center of a circle. The focus person may want a chair or need space for mobility devices, as well as the dog and any family or aides who will be centered with them. Ask about the best way to keep the dog centered and calm during the ritual. It may be easiest to have it in a sit-stay or a down-stay, but that may make it hard for the community to see it. The ritual calls for the service dog’s gear to be passed around, which may confuse some dogs to whom having their gear off signals that they’re “off duty.” If the focus person prefers to keep the dog dressed in its gear, you can pass around a ribbon for the community to bless, which can then be tied to the harness or leash. You may want to recruit a helper to track the gear or ribbon, keep it moving, and bring it to you when needed. If the focus person is unable to read or sign the vows or is uncomfortable doing so, a friend or family member can read the script while the focus person holds the ritual item. If the focus person is blind or low vision, take special care to describe what’s happening in the room (e.g., “We’re passing the vest around from person to person,” or “Your dog is looking at you so intently right now!”). If the focus person is Deaf or hard of hearing, make sure you have an ASL interpreter or other language assistance ready for the day of the ritual. Toward the end of the ritual, you will offer the community some guidelines on how to interact respectfully with the service dog and the focus person. Familiarize yourself in advance with best practices for this, including “approach the handler and not the dog,” “never offer food to a service dog,” and “keep your own dog away from working service dogs.” (Some reputable sources of guidelines include Guide Dogs of America, NEADS World Class Service Dogs, and Canine Companions.) In addition, ask the focus person what they want the community to know about how to interact with their dog in particular. You may want to prepare a handout. Script Opening Words We gather today to bless the partnership between [Name] and Service Dog [Dog]. [Name] is here to express their gratitude for and commitment to [Dog], and we are here to witness, bless, and offer our ongoing support to this partnership. The partnership between a service dog and their human is a sacred thing. [Dog] [has been trained, is in training] specifically to learn tasks that assist [Name] with daily life, to help [Name] live a full and thriving life with their disability. It is a relationship of trust: the human trusting the dog to assist them skillfully, the dog trusting the human to care for its needs and well-being. It is a relationship of steadfast devotion, love, and joy. Blessing the Gear Today, [Name] will make vows to [Dog], and we will bless some of the symbols of their partnership. The most identifiable of these symbols is the [vest, harness, leash] that [Dog] wears when they are working. (Hold up the dog’s gear for people to see.) When the dog is wearing this, it’s a sign that it is working and we should not touch or pet it. But we have an opportunity now to imbue it with our blessings. We will pass it around, and as each of you hold it, I invite you to take a moment with it. You may want to hold it gently, and silently offer your best wishes for this partnership—you may even picture these blessings and warm wishes flowing through your hands and into the [vest, harness, leash]. When you’re ready, pass it to the next person, and it will make its way around the room. (Give the gear to the first participant, or have a helper do so. Continue the ritual as it is passed around.) Vows [Name], your partnership with [Dog] is both a solemn responsibility and a joyous blessing. Will you offer your vows to [Dog], your promises about how you will be in this partnership? (The focus person holds up a few pieces of food or a dog treat.) F OCUS PERSON: [Dog], I’m grateful for all the ways you will help me and take care of me. I promise to take care of you to the best of my ability, tending to your health and well-being. I promise to always make sure you have shade on hot days, plenty of water, visits to a kind vet when you need them, and, of course, the best of food. (The focus person feeds the treat to the dog. They may want to have the dog follow some command to “earn” the treat, such as lying down or giving their paw to shake.) L EADER: May you both be nourished and cared for, and may you be well. Focus PERSON: [Dog], you are such an example of love and service. [They name a few things that they love and appreciate about the dog, e.g., “I love how your eyes express such soulful attention” or “I love the way you cuddle up to me when I’m having a bad pain day.”] I promise to offer you love, affection, and appreciation in return. (The focus person pets the dog or offers them other physical affection.) L EADER: May you both know yourself surrounded by love. (The focus person holds up a tennis ball or new dog toy, if the dog won’t be fixated on it. If offering a toy and then taking it away would upset the dog or derail the ritual, have it gift-wrapped.) F OCUS PERSON: [Dog], you are so focused and dedicated when you’re working. I promise to always make sure you have plenty of time to play! I’m grateful for all the ways you remind me to be playful and experience joy. [They name some examples, e.g., “I love when you’re outside and you pause to sniff the breeze; it reminds me to slow down and appreciate the world too” or “I love how happy you are to meet any new doggie playmate; it reminds me to greet others with joy and openness too.”] I promise to make sure you get lots of exercise and daily time for play. (The focus person gives the toy to the dog, or holds up the wrapped gift and says, “This is a new toy for us to play with later.”) L EADER: May you both make time for joy and play. (Return the dog’s gear to the focus person so they can hold it up to be seen.) F OCUS PERSON: And finally, [Dog], I thank you for all your hard work to help me every day. [They name some of the dog’s tasks, e.g., “I’m grateful for your careful guidance as we cross busy streets” or “I’m grateful for each time you pick up something I’ve dropped.”] I promise to keep up with our training, so I can be the best partner for you I can be, and to trust you as we travel together through life. (The focus person puts the gear on the dog.) L EADER: [Dog], may you wear this [vest, harness, leash], blessed by these people who love and support you, and may you and [Name] know yourselves surrounded by the blessings and best wishes of this gathered community. [Name] and [Dog], we are so delighted to support this partnership. We, this gathered community, offer our love and our commitment to continued learning about the best ways to be in community with a service dog partnership. (Either describe the ground rules you prepared or provide a handout of them. You may want to do both.) To celebrate your partnership, we’ll close with a special song. The song “Where You Go, I Will Go, Beloved” was written by Shoshana Jedwab. Its lyrics come from the biblical book of Ruth, and they express a promise to journey together in love. [Name], maybe you want to sing it to [Dog], and know they express that same commitment every time they put their vest on. And this gathered community sings it to both of you, as we promise to journey alongside you. Let’s sing together. Song “Where You Go” (Shoshana Jedwab) (Lead participants in singing.) Closing Words [Name] and [Dog], we’re so glad the two of you have found your way to each other. May you go forth with the love and blessings of this community. Congratulations!