For Those Living on the Threshold of Significant Change Rev. Karen Hering Blessings are especially important when we find ourselves on the thresholds of new roles, identities, and experiences. Whether we wanted the change or are facing it unwillingly, whether we planned for and expected the change or have been taken by surprise, a blessing offers us safe passage by assuring us we are witnessed and supported. While serving as associate minister at Unity Church-Unitarian in St. Paul, Minnesota, the author led the congregation in offering this blessing every year to members on the cusp of significant personal change. It is designed to be part of a congregational worship service, but can be adapted for anyone living through great change. For a more in-depth perspective on the theology of this blessing, see the author’s book Trusting Change: Finding Our Way through Personal and Global Transformation. Materials □ Flat cords or ribbons, one to span each aisle or path that the focus people will move along □ Copies and/or projected script of the responsive blessing Setup Choose cords or ribbons that will be visible against the floor, but that are easy to step or roll over and will not present tripping hazards. Have them rolled up at the front of the ritual space, and designate helpers to unroll them at the appropriate time. Announce ahead of time that this ritual will be happening and invite focus people to sign up. Make clear that while they will be named and blessed in the ritual, the particulars of their threshold moments will not be shared. Tell them that they will be invited to the front of the sanctuary but that they may also receive the blessing without coming forward. Alternatively, you can adapt the ritual so as not to name or mark out individuals at all, but instead to bless a community in general. Script Opening Words Today, we as a community will bless those among us who are living on the sometimes terrifying, sometimes exhilarating threshold of significant change. We know that all of us are living in threshold times—collectively or individually—to some degree, but those we name and bless today have specifically requested our blessing of their passage. Some of their thresholds are desired and chosen; many are not. Their particulars are unique, and each person must determine how best to cross their threshold, where to find the wisdom, courage, and guidance they need. Crossing thresholds is often daunting and difficult. It can be frightening, overwhelming, and confusing. There are losses and there is grief, as well as gifts and excitement. Always, there will be portions of the journey that can only be made alone. But always, there will also be companions whose presence and witness, whose kindness and wisdom, will mean that even the solitary path need not be lonely and need not bring despair. These are characteristics of life on the threshold, which, in addition to all of that, is sacred, alive with new possibilities, a chance to practice letting go, mustering courage and curiosity, finding wisdom, and fostering a larger Love that abides even and especially in the midst of loss and change. This is the sacred and significant work of living on the threshold. This is the work I ask you to now join me in blessing. Calling Forth Those on a Threshold I will read the names. You may not know the particulars of their thresholds—and you don’t need to in order to bless them and uphold them through this passage in their life. For those being named, please come forward when your name is called, or stand, or wave to us from your seat. Here are the names of this year’s thresholders. (Speak the names and gather the focus people who come forward at the front of the space, facing the participants.) Responsive Blessing Will the community please rise in body or spirit and read with me responsively the words of blessing? And if you have not been named but are yourself on a threshold, please feel free to silently receive this blessing, listening as others around you speak it to you. For all those pausing on a threshold, about to move into the unknown, we are present with you. P ARTICIPANTS: Although we may not know the particulars of your threshold, which is uniquely yours, we offer you our supportive presence for steadiness on your path, our compassionate and understanding minds to hear your hopes and fears, and our open hearts to share the joys and sorrows of your passage, spoken and unspoken. L EADER: As you move toward the uncertainty of all that is unfolding, we remind you of the Love that holds you, certain and true. P ARTICIPANTS: May your heart remain open to grieve what you are leaving and to receive the gifts that will come your way in this crossing. L EADER: May your own inner light guide you and may you learn to trust it, even when it does not shine far down the road. P ARTICIPANTS: If your light begins to flicker and fade, we will offer sparks to reignite it. L EADER: May you be blessed by courage to keep moving into the life that awaits you. P ARTICIPANTS: May you be blessed by compassion, especially for yourself. L EADER: May this passage bring you new discoveries and renewed faith, and offer you a gateway to ancient wisdom and healing wholeness. P ARTICIPANTS: May you always remember the pledge of this community, extending hand and heart, open to you in all that is to come. Please be seated and turn your attention to the aisle as those we have blessed will now cross this symbolic threshold on the floor and pass through your midst, receiving the blessing of your presence in addition to the words you have spoken. And if you are on a threshold and have received this blessing from wherever you are, please take this time of silence, as other thresholders cross the symbolic threshold and return to their seats, to fully absorb this blessing given to you as well. (Have helpers unroll the ribbons or cords across the heads of the aisles or paths the focus people will go back down. The focus people cross over the ribbon or cord thresholds, moving from the front of the space to the back. After they have reached the back, have the focus people return to their seats.)