For Letting Go Rev. Kimberley Debus This is a ritual of healing, of releasing negative attachments to thoughts, regrets, disappointments, etc. It is suitable for groups of any size. It may be used with a particular focus, such as conflict, judgment, or grief, or with a more general theme of healing. Materials □ Altar table □ Dissolving paper □ Markers, at least one for each participant (water-soluble markers will tint the water, which you may or may not want) □ Large, clear vessel of water □ Long spoon for stirring □ Baskets for papers and markers □ Music Setup Decide how you will phrase the opening words. What concern, event, or theme is the ritual focusing on, what kinds of emotions around it are your participants holding, and what action do you want to move them toward? Cut the paper into slips. If you would like participants to write only a word or phrase, cut it into two-inch squares; if you want to invite more in-depth reflections, cut larger pieces. Make at least one slip for each participant. Put the paper slips and markers into baskets. You can recruit helpers to pass them during the ritual or have participants pass them hand to hand. Place the vessel of water and the spoon on the altar table. Decide which parts of Coco Love Alcorn’s “The River” you and participants will sing. Provide lyrics if participants are singing the whole song. Script Opening Words We hear the phrase “letting go” all the time. Let go of anxiety, anger, disappointment, frustration, regret. But it’s not always easy, and so we focus on them, fixating on our longing to destroy those negative thoughts and feelings. We repeat positive affirmations to dispel them, we imagine balls of energy consuming them, we use fire to burn them. And still we don’t let them go. Indeed, by striving to destroy them in these ways, we’re actually focusing our attention on them. What happens when we decide to relax and let them dissolve away? We are all carrying [thoughts, feelings] because of [issue or event]. And while one ritual will not remove the problem, letting go of our [thoughts, feelings] will help us [action]. When we relax and let those concerns dissolve away, we are more able to [action] with love, grace, and patience. Take a moment and think about the [thoughts, feelings] you long to let dissolve away, as we prepare to undertake our ritual of letting go. (Allow a moment or two of quiet. Then begin passing out the baskets with the paper and markers.) The baskets now being passed contain small slips of paper and markers; please take one of each and write or draw the thing you wish to let go of. (Allow time for the passing and the writing.) Now that we’ve written these things down, it’s time to let them go. Many cultures use water to carry away troubles, from the floating flowers placed at the shore for the Santeria goddess Yemaya to take away to the Christian ritual of baptism, meant to wash away sin. Water is cleansing and releasing. You are now invited to dissolve your anxiety, anger, disappointment, frustration, and regret into the cool water in this vessel. Let go, allow your troubles to be dissolved away. As you drop the slip of paper into the water and give it a stir, you may wish to say, “I release my attachment to this.” (While people are coming up, offer some gentle instrumental music. When everyone has stirred their paper into the water, invite participants to sing with you.) Song “The River” (Coco Love Alcorn) (Lead participants in singing.) Responsive Prayer (Place a hand on the vessel of water or lift it up.) Please join me in prayer, responding with “We give thanks for this healing water.” Spirit of Compassion and Release, we give thanks to the earth for its life-giving, healing, sustaining gift of water, and give thanks for this container in which our burdens can be held, dissolved, and removed. We open our hearts and minds to offer gratitude, saying— P ARTICIPANTS: We give thanks for this healing water. L EADER: We can now start to free our minds, and turn to curiosity and wonder. For this we say— P ARTICIPANTS: We give thanks for this healing water. L EADER: We can now start to feel lighter, and turn to possibility. For this we say— P ARTICIPANTS: We give thanks for this healing water. L EADER: We can now start to feel freer, and turn to passion and strength. For this we say— P ARTICIPANTS: We give thanks for this healing water. L EADER: We can now start to feel energized, and turn to love and commitment. For this we say— P ARTICIPANTS: We give thanks for this healing water. L EADER: For all this and more, we say amen. P ARTICIPANTS: Amen. L EADER: Let us close by singing “There’s a River Flowin’ in My Soul.” Song “There’s a River Flowin’ in My Soul” (Faya Ora Rose Touré) (Lead participants in singing.)