For Beginning and Ending a Congregational Year Rev. Craig M. Nowak and Rev. Sara Ascher This multigenerational stone communion ritual uses gathered stones to mark the path along which a faith community travels together. It expresses that every person entering the community changes and is changed by it. This exchange of influence is enduring. This is one of the reasons the ritual uses stones rather than some other kind of token: they too endure, and we can hold on to them as a reminder that we are part of something more than ourselves. The ritual is held twice annually, at the beginning and end of the congregational year, at the Brookfield Unitarian Universalist Church in Brookfield, Mass., where Revs. Craig and Sara served as ministers. Materials □ Altar table □ Small table □ Stones □ Bowl for stones (preferably one through which the stones can be seen: glass, wire mesh, etc.) □ Music Setup For the fall ritual, tell people in advance when it will be held, and remind them to bring a stone with them to church that day. If you did a stone communion the previous spring, they can bring the stone they took then, but it can also be a new one. Provide additional stones for those who might have forgotten to bring one or who are new or visiting and wish to participate, and offer them to people as they enter the space. For the spring ritual, ensure that some stones will be left over after everyone who wants to has taken one. If your attendance has significantly increased since the fall, for instance, you may need to add more. Put the bowl on the altar table or in some other prominent place in the worship space. (If you have done this ritual before, it should already be there and have some stones in it from the previous spring or fall.) Place the small table somewhere that will be accessible to participants. Choose quiet, reflective music that will create a contemplative mood. In the fall, recruit a helper to bring a stone to anyone who needs one at the last minute. Script FALL STONE COMMUNION (This version should be held as part of the first gathering of the congregational year.) Opening Words As the long days of summer recede and make way for the coming season, we again gather together. And we ritualize, by the gathering of stones, our intention to build together a reminder, a touchstone, of our greatest aspirations and hopes for our ministry together and for the community during the coming months and year. Our coming together is more than merely returning to a familiar place. It is strengthening and renewing our promise to embody a welcoming faith community of caring, support, and service. A commitment made by each of us to one another. A commitment made by those who were here before us and by those of you who have ventured here today for the first time, a commitment to be taken up by the seekers who will cross our threshold in the weeks, months, and years to come. Stone Communion Each of you should have a stone that you have either brought with you this morning or were given when you entered. If you don’t have a stone, raise your hand and someone will bring you one. The collecting of these stones represents that each of us in this community adds something beautiful and unique, changing the congregation, and that we each receive something in return, changing us. This exchange is enduring. Those who are no longer with us leave behind something of themselves, as signified by the stones that remain year after year, and today we freely add something of ourselves to this community. The stones will then be placed here [name a prominent place in the worship space] until our last service before summer. I invite everyone who wishes to participate to come forward now, row by row, in silent reflection to place your stone in this bowl in appreciation of this place and its people, as we once again gather to build this faith community anew. (Move the bowl from the altar table to the small table. Have music played as people come forward and place their stones in it. Have a helper bring a smaller bowl to anyone who can’t come forward, then empty it into the bigger bowl. Once everyone who wishes has participated, put your own stone in and put the bowl on the altar table or in another prominent position in the space. It should remain there throughout the church year.) Blessing The stones are now placed, and the congregation gathered anew. In the placing of our stones, each of us contributes to and commits to the growth and vitality of this beloved community. Each of us is called to be, and to become part of, something more. Today we give thanks for this community: a place and a people whom we pledge to journey with, build alongside, have faith in, and love. Amen and blessed be. SPRING STONE COMMUNION (This version should be held as part of the last gathering of the congregational year.) Opening Words We began this church year by bringing stones, marking the regathering of this congregation and reminding us that each of us brings something beautiful and enduring to this faith community. Now, at the church year’s end, we prepare to take a stone away with us. Not to mark an ending, but to expand our reach and connection. We each take a stone, remembering that we carry something of this faith and each other out into the world beyond these walls: something to hold on to while we may be apart, something to share with those we meet, something to bring back when we gather again. Stone Communion I invite everyone who wishes to come forward quietly, reverently, with a reflective heart and mind, to choose a stone from the collection that we created, representing the fullness and richness of this beloved congregation. Take a stone that speaks to you, that reminds you that you are not alone and the heart of this community travels with you even while we are apart. (Take the bowl from where it has been displayed since the previous fall and set it on the small table. Have music played as people come forward and take a stone from it. Once everyone who wishes has participated, take a stone yourself and then return the bowl to its place.) Blessing The stones we now carry are unique and precious. Each is a tangible symbol of our belonging together. May they be reminders of the beauty and strength of this community and our shared faith, until we meet again. Amen and blessed be.