For Beginning Gender-Affirming Hormone Therapy Rev. Bran Lennox This is a ritual of blessing for a transgender individual as they take their first dose(s) of gender-affirming hormones. It is recommended as a stand-alone ritual for a small group of supporters, but can be adapted to serve as part of a congregational worship service. Materials □ Altar table □ Hormone medication □ Blessing card □ Bowl with a little water □ Hand towel Setup This ritual uses the focus person’s hormone medication. If for any reason the focus person can’t bring their actual hormones with them, you can substitute something else. For example, the focus person could bring the paper prescription with them, or a box of mints that they will eat alongside their first few doses, or a sacred object that they will store with their hormones or have at hand as they take them. Consult with the focus person in advance to learn how they want you to identify and describe them and their journey to this point. Work with them to ensure that the script suits them. The ritual includes an opportunity for the focus person to share a reflection about their transition journey, their beliefs, and their pains and hopes; it could be only a few sentences, or up to eight minutes long. (Giving people an eight minute time limit tends to produce a ten minute reflection, which we recommend as an upper limit to keep things moving.) Give them ample time to decide if they want to do this, and offer support in preparing it if they do. Additionally, the ritual calls on the focus person’s loved ones to provide active support, as a strong support network is an important part of an individual’s well-being during transition. Many transgender people are not accepted by their family of origin. It is important to affirm that the gathered community fully recognizes chosen family as family. The ritual also offers some community education, which can make it beneficial in a congregational setting. If it is used in a worship service, it should be a single continuous element of the service. Prepare a small card containing the four-line blessing from the script below. Place the altar table front and center in the ritual space, with chairs or stools in front of it if you or the focus person want them. The lit chalice, water bowl, and hand towel may all be placed on the altar table for convenience. The focus person should keep their hormones (or alternative object) on their person. Script Opening Words Here we have gathered to bless and offer our wholehearted support to [Name] on this next stage of their journey of transition. We are gathering to affirm without reservation that [Name] is a [woman, man, nonbinary person, agender person, or other term as preferred by the focus person]. We are here to hold space for the heartbreaks felt along this path, and the many fears which may accompany each stage of a gender transition. And yet we are also here to celebrate and magnify those special gifts which only a transgender person gets to experience—the moments of euphoria and magic, the discoveries of community and self which unfold. [Name] has considered deeply and made the courageous decision about the next stage of their pursuit of expressing the most genuine form of their self. Before today, [Name] has [describe previous gender-affirming decisions, such as “revealed their name,” “come out to their community,” “changed their wardrobe,” “aligned their body more with their image of self,” or anything else the focus person wants you to share]. Now, [Name] is beginning the transformative process of hormone therapy, as they prepare to take their first doses of [name of hormone]. Handwashing [Name], before you move forward, there’s a sacred part of this process that we have to honor so that what comes next can be greeted with full joy. We know that our own expectations about what our lives should be can be the biggest barrier to appreciating what they actually are. I want to give you the gift of a beginning blessed by curiosity and exploration. So that you may be free of any nagging worries and cloying expectations, I offer you this cleansing water. Please wash your hands with it now, knowing that in so doing you are freeing yourself of these obstacles. (The focus person washes their hands and dries them with the towel. You may want to hold the bowl for them, or hand them the towel.) Blessing (If a symbolic object is being used rather than the hormone themselves, first explain what it is and then change the wording below accordingly.) Now that we are open to what lies ahead, I’m going to invite you, [Name], to take the bottle of hormones in your hands. Hold it close, close your eyes, and we will hold a circle of silence for you as you silently place your hopes, intentions, and good will into it. (Allow thirty seconds to one minute of silence.) Now open your eyes, but continue to hold on to that bottle. Hug it to your chest. Look out at these loving people who have gathered in support of you today. I’m going to ask everyone present to offer their silent hopes, intentions, and good will to you. (Turn toward the gathered participants.) Please offer [Name] your open hands; if it’s comfortable for you, lift them up like this. (Put your open hands up, with your palms facing the focus person.) You may also keep your hands in your lap with palms up, or simply visualize. Allow your breath to fill you up with light as you send it through your hands to [Name] and their hormones. (Hold position in silence for a few moments before continuing.) [Name], we’re offering you all the love and support in the room today. Will [Name]’s loved ones join me in naming aloud into this space, in a word or two, what gifts you are offering? (Offer one or two words yourself as a starting point, such as “listening” or “stability.”) We’ll lower our hands now, but the connection in our hearts remains. I will now offer you a blessing, which I will read aloud and then give to you to take home. Whenever you take a dose of your hormones, take the opportunity for a quiet moment of gratitude to reflect and feel the sacred nature of this transition. I recommend keeping this blessing by your hormones, along with a few items which inspire or comfort you. Let it be a reminder of all the support and love present in this room today. [Name], In body, as it was, is, and will be, you are complete. In knowing and learning of self, you are a beacon. In community, family, and friends, you are held. In the unfolding of your sacred life, you are a miracle. (Give the blessing card to the focus person.) I’ll ask you to put this with your hormones in a safe place. Reflection [Name] has prepared a reflection for us. We are ready to receive what they wish to share, and listen with open minds and hearts. (The focus person shares their reflection, if they wish to. If not, move on to the closing words.) Closing Words In gratitude for all that we have shared here today, we once more open our hands toward [Name] and reaffirm our blessing for their journey. (Lift your hands, palms out, toward the focus person again, and silently invite participants to do the same. Hold position for around ten quiet seconds.) May you find exactly what you need in this time of transformation. In those moments when fear and pain are with you, may you remember this circle of support and care. May you follow your joy, and continue to make courageous decisions in the service of living your most liberated life.