For a New Year Rev. Kendra Ford This New Year’s ritual is appropriate for a congregation or small group. It can be embedded in Sunday morning worship or done as a separate ritual. Materials □ Two small tables □ A freestanding doorway or something to evoke one □ Small pieces of paper, at least one for each participant □ A cauldron (bowl or cooking pot) □ Larger sheets of paper, one for each participant □ Envelopes, one for each participant □ Pens or pencils, one for each participant □ Basket or bowl big enough for all the letters □ Timer □ Music Setup If you do not have a freestanding doorway, set up something that evokes one, such as a garden arch, or two helpers holding up a horizontal pole with ribbons dangling down from it. A 36-inch opening will allow nearly all wheelchairs, scooters, and other mobility devices to get through; most standard doorways are 32 inches, which may be a problem for some. If there is a step or lintel at the base that people would have to get over, lay a nonslip rug over it. Place the doorway where all participants will be able to approach it, pass through it, and return to their places. On one side of it, set up the cauldron where participants will place their papers to be burned. On the other side, set up the other table with the basket for letters. As people enter the space, they should receive a small piece of paper, a sheet of regular paper, an envelope, and a pen or pencil. Be prepared to hold on to the letters until May and then mail them to participants. Script Opening Words Welcome to the future, where you will live from now on! This isn’t really the future; we only have this breath right now, so really I welcome you to the present, to this one moment between past and future. This is the only moment we ever live in. In this present, in this suspension between past and future, this cusp, a new year’s beginning, I thought we might take as our traveling companion the ancient Roman god Janus, the god who looks forward and looks back, the god of beginnings and endings, the god of doorways. Hymn “May Nothing Evil Cross This Door” (Louis Untermeyer) (Lead participants in singing.) Reflection In this ritual we will take some time to look both backward and forward, like Janus. We will open our hands to let go of what we want to leave behind in the old year, and open our hearts to what we want to carry with us in the new one. Let us begin with a moment of reflection. Take a moment to breathe, the breath going in and out through the door of the body. How do you want to live this coming year? What will you have to give up, to do so? What will you have to let in, to do so? Writing: Letting Go There may be things from the past year that you’d like to let go of in the coming one. Maybe they don’t serve you well, or aren’t good for you; maybe they’ve been wonderful, but their time is over now. Maybe they’re things you don’t want to get rid of, but you know you need to. Whatever they are, hold them in your heart for a moment, those things that belong to the old year and not the new one. Then write them on your small piece of paper. (You may want to play quiet music as people write. After a few minutes, when most people seem to be finished, tell participants that they have about a minute left. When everyone has finished, ask for their attention again.) Writing: Intentions The new year will bring new challenges, new joys, and new times with the people and places we know well already. What do you want to have with you? What will you need to gather, or what do you already have that you want to be sure to keep, as you move forward? Please take ten minutes to write a letter to your future self on your big sheet of paper. We will send your letter to you this spring! Remind your future self what you want to be doing and remembering, what you want to have with you. When you’re done, put it in the envelope and address it to yourself, so we can mail it. Please write your letter now; I’ll let you know when time is almost up. (You may want to play quiet music as people write. After nine minutes, tell participants that they have one minute left. When time is up, remind them to put their letters into their envelopes and address them.) Doorway Be aware, now, that we are in the presence of the ancient of ancients—the doorway. (If you have helpers creating a temporary doorway, they should come forward now and set it up.) People have been building doorways as long as we have been creating shelter, collecting food, leaving for journeys. Doorways mark shelter and safety, doorways mark going out and a fresh start. They are the place where we change from inside to outside, from home to away, from traveler to guest. Doorways mark endings and beginnings all at once. We stand in the doorway of the year this weekend. One year is ending and another is beginning—but we are not fully in the new year, nor entirely out of the old. We are in between years. Like the Roman God Janus, we look both ahead and behind simultaneously. He is the dweller on the threshold, a divinity presiding over the change point of a building and the change point in many lives. The month of January is named for him; it is the month of moving from one year to another. Janus, god of beginnings and endings, reminds us that we always have a chance to begin again. In a moment I will invite you not only to think about the animating power of the doorway, the concept of a being who looks both backward and forward; I will also invite you to experience moving through a doorway yourself, here. I invite you to move into something new, move out of something old. On this side of the door, the past, there is a cauldron. Before you go through the doorway, put what you are leaving behind in the cauldron. It will be burned outside, after the service, to release it. [Indicate the other side of the doorway.] On the other side, over there in the future, there is a basket for your letter to your future self. Leave your self-addressed letter there, and we will mail it to you this spring. Then you can go back to your seat. So now I invite you to move through the doorway here. I invite you to take a breath as you pause on the threshold between past and future, here in this shining present moment. When everyone who wishes to has passed through the doorway, we will share a blessing. (Have music playing as people move through the doorway. Once everyone has finished, offer the following blessing.) Blessing the Doorways May you always have a door that is wide enough and high enough to move through. May you notice your endings and your beginnings. May you put down what you do not need; May you carry with you what you do.