For Veterans Day Rev. Barbara McKusick Liscord This ritual honors the service and experience of military veterans, active service members, and their families on or near Veterans Day (November 11). The script here assumes that the ritual is being done in the context of a congregational worship service. A few weeks prior to the service, you might gather a group of people to share their military experiences; knowing more about them will help you shape the ritual. Materials □ Altar table □ Table for photos □ Five pillar candles Setup Recruit five helpers, one each from the Air Force, Army, Coast Guard, National Guard, and Navy or Marines. They may be past or current service members. If necessary, you could recruit a family member of a current service member instead. Ahead of time, ask congregants who are serving or have served, or who have relatives who have, to bring photos of themselves or their relatives, in uniform if possible. Set up the altar table at the front of the space, and put pillar candles on it; put the table with the photos in another prominent and accessible location. Recruit a trumpeter to play “Taps.” Script Opening Words How many people here had a day off this week for Veterans Day? This morning we are having our own Veterans Day observance. We are remembering, honoring, and praying for all those who have served and still serve in the armed forces of our country. Veterans Day used to be called Armistice Day. It was the celebration of the end of World War I, which was such a terrible war that it was called the War to End all Wars. Armistice Day became a national holiday in 1938, a day to honor veterans of World War I and the cause of world peace. Sadly, we have had many wars since then. In 1954, the United States Congress renamed the holiday Veterans Day, saying that it should be a time when we honor all our country’s veterans for their patriotism and their willingness to serve and sacrifice for the common good, as well as rededicating ourselves to the cause of world peace. In our liberal religious tradition, we know that there are many ways to serve our country. We also know that there are many paths to military service; people may serve by choice, by draft, or because of difficult circumstances. Today, no matter your path or circumstances, we honor you who currently serve and those of you who have served in the US military. We acknowledge that military service often affects those who have served and their families every day, not just one day of the year. As we honor those who have served, we also acknowledge the range of feelings people may have about their service. As part of our ritual today, I’ll invite all of you who have served or are currently serving, and family members of those who are currently serving, to be recognized, so that you and your loved ones may be honored. You were invited to bring pictures of yourselves in uniform, or pictures of your loved ones who have served in the military. They are on the table here, for you to look at after the service. Candle Lighting Now we will light a candle for each branch of the armed services and ask those here who have served in those branches to stand up and say your name. As we go through this part of the ceremony, we may feel moved to clap to show our appreciation for our veterans. But I ask you to hold your applause until the end, so that we may honor each person in silence. I’d like to invite those who will be lighting candles for those who have served in the various branches to come forward: [Name 1], [Name 2], [Name 3], [Name 4], and [Name 5]. (The five helpers come up to the altar table.) H ELPER 1: I am [Name]. I served in the Air Force. I light this candle for all those who have served in the Air Force and for those who are serving in the Air Force today. (They light the candle.) Will those who serve or have served in the Air Force please stand or raise your hand and give your name, so that we may honor you? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Will those of you who have loved ones who serve or have served in the Air Force please stand or raise your hand and say their names? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Thank you. Please be seated. H ELPER 2: I am [Name]. I served in the Army. I light this candle for all those who have served in the Army and those who are serving in the Army today. (They light the candle.) Will those who serve or have served in the Army please stand or raise your hand and give your name, so that we may honor you? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Will those of you who have loved ones who serve or have served in the Army please stand or raise your hand and say their names? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Thank you. Please be seated. H ELPER 3: I am [Name]. I served in the Navy. I light this candle for all those who have served in the Navy and Marines and who are serving in the Navy and Marines today. (They light the candle.) Will those who serve or have served in the Navy or Marines please stand or raise your hand and give your name, so that we may honor you? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Will those of you who have loved ones who serve or have served in the Navy and Marines please stand or raise your hand and say their names? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Thank you. Please be seated. H ELPER 4: I am [Name]. I served in the Coast Guard. I light this candle for all those who have served in the Coast Guard and who are serving in the Coast Guard today. (They light the candle.) Will those who serve or have served in the Coast Guard please stand or raise your hand and give your name, so that we may honor you? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Will those of you who have loved ones who serve or have served in the Coast Guard please stand or raise your hand and say their names? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Thank you. Please be seated. H ELPER 5: I am [Name]. I served in the National Guard. I light this candle for all those who have served in the National Guard and who are serving in the National Guard today. (They light the candle.) Will those who serve or have served in the National Guard please stand or raise your hand and give your name, so that we may honor you? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Will those of you who have loved ones who serve or have served in the National Guard please stand or raise your hand and say their names? (Pause to allow participants to stand or raise hands and call out names.) Thank you. Please be seated. I ask all veterans and active service members to stand or raise your hands, so that we may show our appreciation. (Pause for applause.) Thank you. Please be seated. Let us join our hearts and minds in a spirit of prayer. Prayer “A Prayer for Memorial Day” by David Pyle Spirit of Life, to you we consecrate our silent tears, For the memory of all of those who have fallen in war, For the lives of families broken by loss, For the spirits of those who live with the memories every day, For the loss of our innocence. Spirit of Life, to you we consecrate our silent tears, For the innocent victims of the evil of war, For the destruction we visit upon the miracle of life, For the fear that is spread by the sounds of battle, For the creation of children with haunted eyes. Spirit of Life, to you we consecrate our silent tears, For the young men and women who have come back wounded, For all those who never came back at all. For viewing others as our enemies, For making enemies of ourselves. Spirit of Life, For the memory of all, for our responsibility to all, and for our hope in a better future for all … We consecrate to you our silent tears. Music (The trumpeter plays “Taps.”)