For Blessing a Body after Death Rev. Jami Yandle This ritual is for anyone wishing to bless a loved one who has recently died. It can be done before or after postmortem care, before the body is removed. Materials □ Oil, water, or a favorite lotion of the deceased person If you want to use essential oils, or anything with a scent, be sure no one with scent sensitivities will be present. Setup Set up chairs for participants where they will be able to see you and the body of the deceased person. Allow enough space for you to move around the person and for everyone to gather beside them. Adapt and expand the blessing to reflect the particulars of the person’s life. You could name specific things they did with the different parts of their body: danced with their feet, sang with their hands or voice, etc. You could also bless items that were intimate and intrinsic parts of how they lived in and used their body, such as a wheelchair, communication board, or insulin pump. Script (Move to the deceased person’s feet and lightly dab them with oil, water, or lotion.) We bless [Name]’s feet, which made traveling, journeying, and so many important life passages possible. (Anoint their hands in the same way.) We bless [Name]’s hands, which touched and held loved ones, and were touched and held by them. We honor [Name]’s hands and the lives and communities touched by them. (Anoint their forehead.) We bless [Name]’s mind, the electric spark which held their creativity, thoughts, and dreams, and which made sense of the world. We honor [Name]’s mind and the ways their mind made our lives brighter, better, and more joyful. Their thoughtfulness made the world a better place. (Anoint their throat or lips.) We bless [Name]’s voice, the breath of humanity, the individual ways that we convey our dreams and desires. We honor [Name]’s communication style and voice, easily recognized by those who loved them. (Anoint their chest.) We bless [Name]’s heart, which held their deepest sorrows, hurt, and pain and their greatest joy, peace, and love. [Name], we honor your entire life and your corporeal body. We are grateful for your spirit and your physical presence that traveled through this life and created so much love and care in this world. I invite all those gathered to extend their hands, as they are willing and able, in blessing for our final prayer. Spirit of Life and Love, While our hearts feel broken in this moment, We remain grateful as we honor the joy, life, and love that we shared with [Name]. We offer blessings upon [Name]’s heart, mind, body, and soul As they become our ancestor. In this moment, we say farewell to [Name]’s body. We thank you, Spirit of Life and Love, For the breath of life you breathed into [Name]’s body. And now their breath is stilled. We ask for tenderness and softness in our grief journey, Knowing that [Name]’s spirit and love are with us still. Amen.