For Head Shaving during Chemotherapy Rev. Emily Conger and Rev. Rebecca C. “Beckett” Coppola This head shaving ritual offers a rite of passage to patients and to their circle of support. It can be used to mark a moment in chemotherapy treatment, or in any illness or treatment causing hair loss. There is space for lament and mourning, holding and being with, and there is movement toward reclaiming and celebration, honoring the healing journey being traversed. It is best used by no more than a dozen people. The authors created the original ritual for Beckett’s head shaving during cancer treatment; it embodied healing, transformation, and community connections. They have adapted it here to be appropriate for a larger audience. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Tray for ritual supplies □ Small hair ties, or ribbons cut to about 18 inches □ Body or face paint □ Hair scissors or other very sharp scissors □ Clippers □ Bowl or tray □ Music □ Three towels or sheets □ Tissues (for tears and paint) □ Optional: Bags for cut hair Setup This script assumes that the focus person is undergoing chemotherapy for cancer; if that is not the case, adapt the language accordingly. Give the focus person time in advance to think about what expectations they want to name and let go of in the ritual. Possibilities include their perceptions of their own appearance and how they present themselves in the world, their certainty about what the next months or years will bring, their financial security, or their privacy or independence; whatever comes to mind for them can be honored. If the focus person’s hair can be gathered into locks that are then cut off, discuss in advance with them the best way for this to be done. Choose hair ties or ribbons that suit their hair’s texture. Note that if locks are tied off too close to the scalp, cutting them can be difficult for the participants and painful for the focus person. Depending on the texture, amount, and length of the focus person’s hair and the skill you expect participants to have in handling it, you may want to have participants tie off only small, symbolic locks and, when the time comes, cut them off yourself. Choose soothing and centering music and decor that resonates for the focus person; you can play the music throughout, or let the space be held by silence. Lay a sheet down on the floor in a central location and place the altar table and a comfortable chair on it. Allow space to move around the chair. Put a sheet over the chair and have another one available for the focus person to wear on their shoulders. Gather ritual items and other sacred objects and place them on the altar table. Set up other chairs in a semicircle around it, and put out tissues around the space. Choose a helper to handle the clippers. Let participants know ahead of time that they will be invited to say a few words, share a short poem, or otherwise express their thoughts about being part of a communal healing journey, and also to say a few words of prayer or blessing for the focus person. Script Opening Words Welcome to each of you who has gathered today for this important ritual head shaving. There are many with us in spirit as well—those who live near, those who live far, those who have died—they are all with us, and we feel their loving presence. We are coming with our hearts full of emotion: sadness, loss, fear, anticipation, joy, love, and any others in your heart. All emotions are welcome here. We know that we need loving people to help us honor sacred moments and powerful transitions. You are among the circle of people who have journeyed and will continue to journey with [Name], so it is fitting that you are here today. Chalice Lighting Selection from “Determined Seed” (Laura Wallace) As frozen earth holds the determined seed, this sacred space holds our weariness, our worry, our laughter and our celebration. Let us bring seed and soul into the light of thought, the warmth of community, and the hope of love. (Light the chalice, or have the focus person light it.) Naming the Challenge Evolution and transformation are always a part of our lives, and that is the frame to hold close during this rite of passage. As you all know, [Name]’s doctors have discovered that there are cancer cells in their body which are incompatible with a healthy life. They have determined together that the best path toward healing at this point is through chemotherapy. Chemotherapy can be seen as an injection of the Spirit of Life into the body, in order to transform those cells that have fallen out of harmony with life. The dead cells are broken down and their components are recycled into the body, returning them to be the building blocks of future health. This is a physical and spiritual transformation, worthy of sacred recognition. During our ritual, we will move through five phases, honoring the challenges and possibilities of a healing journey. • First, Invocation. We will gather the community and center ourselves in this moment. • Second, Gathering of the Locks. We will gather locks of [Name]’s hair in order to share some of their burden. • Third, Cutting the Locks. We will cut locks of hair and grieve the path [Name] had planned, which has been diverted. • Fourth, Shaving the Head. We will shave their head to prepare for something new. • And Fifth, Adorning. We will decorate their head in celebration of beauty and possibility. Song “Spirit of Life” (Carolyn McDade) As we recognize the metaphorical injection of the Spirit of Life on this healing journey, let us call that spirit into this moment by singing “Spirit of Life,” by Carolyn McDade. (Lead participants in singing.) Invocation We begin by inviting all who are here to connect to their inner wisdom, to [Name], to the community, and to the Spirit of Life and Love. The laying on of hands has been used in healing rituals for centuries. I invite you to please come up and place your hand on [Name], or on someone who is touching them. (Allow time for participants to do this.) I invite you into a moment of prayer. Let us take three smooth breaths together, balancing the breath in and the breath out, releasing any muscles that are holding excess tension. Spirit of life and love and all that is holy, known by many names, Be with us this day as we recognize this sacred time of transformation in [Name]’s life and the life of their community. Help us to stay connected to the power of love present here as we support [Name]. And guide us gently forward as we journey— in community, in connection, in release, and in healing. I invite you to silently offer your own prayer or intention for our time together. (Pause for a period of silence.) Amen. Gathering of the Locks As the gathered community, you are a part of [Name]’s journey toward healing. Each person is invited to symbolically take ownership and lift a small part of this weight. Through this practice, [Name] has the embodied knowledge that they are not alone. If the focus person’s hair can be gathered into locks The community will participate in gathering and cutting locks of hair. By doing so, we lift some of the burdens and griefs of this journey. I invite each of you to come up and gather a small lock of [Name]’s hair. Tie off the gathered lock and say, “I am with you.” Then share the words you have brought about healing and community. (Add any further instructions that may be needed; if locks are to be saved, for instance, you might ask participants to braid them. Smaller locks are easier to cut. If you are using ribbons or something else without elastic, wrap them twice around the lock of hair and then tie them off tightly. You might go first in this step, to model it for participants, or last to mark its end.) If the focus person’s hair cannot be gathered into locks Each of you is invited now to come into the center, to connect with [Name] in a manner that resonates for you, and say, “I am with you” to them. Then share the words you have brought about healing and community. (Participants might hold the focus person’s hands, look into their eyes, touch or caress their hair, or anything else that is comfortable for the focus person. You might go first in this step, to model it for participants, or last to mark its end.) Scissors In her poem “Sangha,” in her book Go In and In: Poems from the Heart of Yoga, Danna Faulds writes, May we be reminders, each for the other, that the path of transformation passes through the flames. Chemotherapy can be seen as a process of going into a fire so that anything not serving life can be burned away. In this path of fiery transformation, let us honor the shift in expectations of life that is a part of this process. [Name], I want you to think about what expectations have had to change because of this illness. Maybe they are things you envisioned about your vocation, housing, family, priorities, spirituality, or identity. Maybe they had to do with something else entirely. As each lock of your hair is cut, please name one expectation you have had to let go of, and then say to it, “I release you in love.” (Participants take turns coming forward, cutting a lock or portion of hair, and placing it on the bowl or tray. You might go first in this step, to model it for participants, or last to mark its end; or you might do all the cutting yourself if that seems advisable. With each cut the focus person names an expectation: for example, “Privacy, I release you in love.” If they prefer not to name one aloud, they can say something like “I release another thing in love.”) Letting go of expectations and moving forward even the smallest bit takes courage and grace. Later in her poem “Sangha,” Faulds writes, to stay on the path day after day, choosing the unknown and facing yet another fear, that is nothing short of grace. Clippers We are now heading into the fallow time of the healing journey, a time when things will need to pause. Shaving the head metaphorically clears the field so it can rest for winter. We prepare well, in hopes that the seeds that will be planted in the spring can grow and thrive. As [Name]’s head is shaved with clippers, I invite you to sing “There Is a Love,” a meditative hymn which connects us to the core of our being in this universe. Song “There Is a Love” (words by Rebecca Parker, music by Elizabeth Norton) (Lead participants in singing while the helper cuts the focus person’s hair very short, about a quarter inch.) Adorning (If you are playing background music, shift it now to something more upbeat and celebratory.) We will now take some time to adorn [Name]. By doing so, we bless them with possibility, love, and the power of our collective community. We do this creative practice to celebrate the beauty and resilience in this moment and the moments to come. Let us now collectively adorn the newly shaven head of our beloved [Name] with colors and patterns. If you feel called to do so, you can say a few words of prayer or offer words of blessing to [Name] as you paint. (Give any necessary instructions about using the face or body paint, and either have participants take turns or invite two or three up at once, depending on how crowded the space will get.) (As the adornment is nearing completion, offer the following reading. Read it slowly, pausing after each stanza.) Let go of the idea that you know what breathing should feel like. Just notice the breath as it moves in and out of the body. Let go of certainty. Be with the breath as it is. Allow openness. Allow curiosity. Notice the mind. Each thought that arises. Allow openness. Don’t judge your mind. Or your experience. Be loving in your curiosity about each thought. Let go of certainty. Let go of any idea about what you should be thinking, accepting your thoughts exactly as they are. Be with yourself as you are. Be curious about who you are. Love how you are in the world. Gently and intentionally take a breath, maybe even give a big sigh, reenter the present moment and the stream of your life. Please join me now in singing “I Know This Rose Will Open,” by Mary Grigolia. As you sing, notice what has unfurled for you in this time of community, what has opened for you, and what has been burned away by the power of love. Song “I Know This Rose Will Open” (Mary Grigolia) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing Let us gather our collective energy once again, joining in a circle as we admire [Name]’s beauty, strength, and resilience. (Have everyone, including the focus person, join hands.) [Name], may you feel the strength of this community through each part of the journey toward physical and spiritual harmony and health. May you know that you are not alone and that you are held in love. Let us extinguish our chalice with these words by an anonymous author: May we be reminded here of our highest aspirations, and inspired to bring our gifts of love and service to the altar of humanity. May we know once again that we are not isolated beings but connected, in mystery and miracle, to the universe, to this community, and to each other. Amen. (Extinguish the chalice.)