For Abortion Rev. Susan Chorley This is a ritual to follow an abortion. It includes options to cover abortion of an unexpected or unplanned pregnancy, abortion of a wanted pregnancy, abortion chosen by a person already parenting children, and abortion connected with violence or abuse; you can choose and combine the elements relevant to your circumstances. Remember that this ritual, and the experience of abortion, may bring feelings of celebration or relief to some, while to others it may evoke grief; some people will feel multiple and even conflicting emotions. The ritual is designed to recognize an individual’s abortion experience, and that of their partner(s) if relevant, in all its complexity. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Small taper candles or votives □ Bowl or tray of sand, to hold candles □ Oil for anointing □ Meditation bell or chime □ Optional: Flowers Setup Set up the room to be warm, welcoming, and sacred, perhaps with some candles lit. Invite people to light a candle as they enter. Put the altar table in the middle of the space, with the chalice, candles, bowl or tray of sand, anointing oil, and perhaps some flowers on it. Set up a circle of chairs for the focus person and participants to sit in. It is important to engage the focus person or people in the ritual’s planning, as well as any support people they may want to include, so that the experience will meet their specific needs. Ask them to think about what they would like to share in the ritual, using the following questions to spark their thoughts: • What do you want yourself and others to know about your experience? • What words of compassion can you offer to yourself in this moment? • What do you need from those who love you? How can we best hold and support you at this time? • What kind of blessing do you wish to offer to yourself, or your partner, or the soul whom you could not welcome into this living world? • What is the wisdom of this experience, and how will it carry you forward? • What is the new shape of light your experience of abortion is offering? Script Chalice Lighting It is with gratitude that I welcome you to this space and this time set apart for acknowledging the multitude of feelings we hold in our minds, hearts, and bodies regarding an abortion decision. Our bodies are sacred. The decisions we make about our bodies and potential life are sacred. They are also full of complexity. And in this space and time we wish only to acknowledge the sacredness of our bodies and our lives. In this time we wish to lift up the holiness inherent in a decision that may be our liberation and that may also feel painful or conflicted. It is in this both/and space that we light our chalice, to remind us of the great light that is glowing in the world and within all beings. (Light the chalice.) There are as many stories of abortion as there are people who have experienced abortion. Because of the heightened political and religious tensions surrounding abortion, and because the choice is uniquely private and often stigmatized, we rarely get to hear the detailed and precious story of an individual’s decision and experience. And yet all of life’s passages are worthy of acknowledgment through ritual. We are grateful for this time set aside to be with [Name(s)] following an abortion experience. Song “Stay with Me” (Jacques Berthier) I invite you now into a time of singing. We will sing together a song from the Taizé Christian monastic community that repeats the words of Jesus as he prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane the night before he was betrayed. The words mirror the experience of all of us facing a challenging experience and wanting the support and care of our community. Following the Taizé tradition, we will sing the chorus through multiple times, until we feel a natural sense of closure. After singing, we will hold a few minutes of silence together. (Lead participants in singing the song through ten or fifteen times, then hold silence for a few minutes. At the end of the time of silence, ring a meditation bell or chime.) Sharing We will now enter into a time of open sharing and community compassion. [Name(s)], we ask you to begin by sharing any reflections you wish on your experience of abortion, and then on how we can best support you at this time. (The focus person or people share as they wish to.) We are here surrounding [Name(s)] to offer our support and care. Having heard their story and what they need from us in this moment, I invite those gathered here to reflect back to them words of care and compassion. How can you support them? How are you holding them in this time? [Give instructions about how people should speak up: in order around the circle, popcorn style, etc.] Let us take several moments of silent reflection and meditation, and when the bell rings, you are invited to share your support and care with [Name(s)]. (Hold a few minutes of silence, then ring the bell or chime.) Support can take many forms, sometimes in words and sometimes not. If you find yourself without words, you can press hand over your heart to quietly offer your support. Reading “the mother” (Gwendolyn Brooks) Abortions will not let you forget. You remember the children you got that you did not get, The damp small pulps with a little or with no hair, The singers and workers that never handled the air. You will never neglect or beat Them, or silence or buy with a sweet. You will never wind up the sucking-thumb Or scuttle off ghosts that come. You will never leave them, controlling your luscious sigh, Return for a snack of them, with gobbling mother-eye. I have heard in the voices of the wind the voices of my dim killed children. I have contracted. I have eased My dim dears at the breasts they could never suck. I have said, Sweets, if I sinned, if I seized Your luck And your lives from your unfinished reach, If I stole your births and your names, Your straight baby tears and your games, Your stilted or lovely loves, your tumults, your marriages, aches, and your deaths, If I poisoned the beginnings of your breaths, Believe that even in my deliberateness I was not deliberate. Though why should I whine, Whine that the crime was other than mine?— Since anyhow you are dead. Or rather, or instead, You were never made. But that too, I am afraid, Is faulty: oh, what shall I say, how is the truth to be said? You were born, you had body, you died. It is just that you never giggled or planned or cried. Believe me, I loved you all. Believe me, I knew you, though faintly, and I loved, I loved you All. We will now enter into a time of quiet meditation, reflecting on these words. Following the quiet together we will sing. (Allow a few minutes of silence.) Song “Find a Stillness” (words: Carl G. Seaburg, music: Transylvanian hymn with harmony by Larry Phillips) (Lead participants in singing.) Witnessing A midrash, a Jewish commentary, on the creation story in the book of Genesis says that when God said, “Let there be light,” ten vessels appeared, each filled with light. But they were too fragile to contain the holy light, and they shattered, scattering the light throughout the universe. The midrash reminds us that even in the shattering pain of life, there is light to be found everywhere. The experience of abortion can feel like a breaking open of our hearts, our feelings, our bodies, our spirits. Each of us is full of holy and sacred light—and we continue to shine that forth into the world. Honoring the light that bursts forth from the brokenness of our world, [Name(s)], we invite you to share with us what kind of blessing you might want to offer to yourselves, or to the soul whom you could not welcome into this living world. What is the wisdom of your experience, and how will you carry it forward? What new shape of light does your abortion experience offer? (The focus person or people take some time to share.) Let us remain in silence for a few minutes. You are welcome to light a candle and place it in the [bowl or tray], as a reminder of the light that bursts forth from all of us. (Participants light candles as they wish.) Anointing From ancient times, people have anointed one another as a way of offering healing and comfort. The feel and scent of the oil is a physical reminder of the care and comfort we all deserve and desire. We invite [Name(s)] to enter into the circle for the ritual of anointing. May this anointing be a blessing to you and a symbol of love for you, your body, your decisions, and the holiness inherent in it all. (Anointing words for a variety of circumstances are offered below. Choose the ones most appropriate for the focus person or people. You can combine parts of several.) For an unexpected or unplanned pregnancy [Name(s)], you are brave and cherished and brilliant and full of grace. You made a decision for yourself, for the world, out of love and full of worth. We are with you in the myriad of feelings you hold in this moment, and that you held in the time leading up to your decision to end your pregnancy, and in any story you wish to share with the world or hold in the depth of your beautiful soul. Most of all, we want you to know you are not alone. Countless people have gone before you on this path, and countless others will follow. And yet your story of abortion is unique, as is each person’s. May you cherish yourself and your decision, and know that you are cherished by this community and in this world. Amen and blessed be. For those already parenting children [Name(s)], you are a good parent. That has not changed. Sometimes a decision for abortion is the best parenting decision you can make. Breathe in the blessing of your sacredness and the sacredness of this decision. Breathe out any place where you cannot celebrate your goodness or might hold yourself back from full life and full love. Amen and blessed be. For a survivor of abuse or violence [Name(s)], your body is precious, holy, and sacred. Abuse and violence were a violation of the sanctity of your body and spirit. Though we live in a world that is broken by oppression and an ongoing lack of compassion and care, this reality was never meant to be and is always to be condemned. No human deserves violence or abuse. You did nothing to deserve to be treated as less than the holy, precious, amazing person you are. Sometimes the termination of a pregnancy can be the best, safest, and most caring decision you can make for your body and for the future body and soul of a little one. Even so, the decision can be painful, and we want you to know you are not alone. We surround you now and will surround you in the future with love, acceptance, and deep care. Amen and blessed be. For a wanted pregnancy [Name(s)], we are with you in your grief and in the painful decision you had to make. Know that the pain of this loss will never completely leave you, and that you are forever deeply loved, respected, and inherently good. Allow the jagged edges of the pain surrounding the end of this pregnancy to be slowly sanded down by the care, compassion, and respect your family and community hold out for you. The soul that you could not welcome at this time wishes you well. You will have a soul connection forever in liminal space between this life and the next. Amen and blessed be. Song “Courage, My Friend” (South African call and response song) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing As we close this sacred time together, let us rise in body or spirit and hold hands. Hear these words by the poet Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha, from her poem “Femme Futures.” Where does the future live in your body? Touch it. When I hear us dream our futures, believe we will make it to one, We will make one. The future lives in our bodies. (Extinguish the chalice.) May we go from this place blessed by the future that is in our bodies, the future we dreamed of and co-created in this time, and the future we are building for all people—full of love, acceptance, compassion, and deep joy.