For Blessing Backpacks Rev. Erika Hewitt This ritual, designed to be used in a congregational worship service or other congregational gathering, invites the congregation—all ages—to bless backpacks, book bags, computer bags, knitting totes, etc., at the beginning of the school and congregational year. Many congregations offer such blessings. Materials □ Optional: Tags, keychains, or other emblems to be attached to bags Setup Several weeks in advance, invite people to bring their bag to worship on the chosen day. If you want to distribute tags, obtain and prepare them. Script We carry bags with us throughout the week for many reasons. If you have a bag with you and you want to have it blessed, come up front, lift up your bag, or have someone lift it up for you when you hear me describe you. (Pause after each statement to allow time for participants to come forward or lift up their bags.) Some of us take books and homework to school. Some of us bring our lunches to school or to work. Some of us take computers and other supplies to the places where we work. Some kids carry overnight bags from one parent’s house to another parent’s house, and back again. Some people bring things like books or yarn and knitting needles to places where they might need to wait patiently. Some of us bring diapers and snacks to daycare or the park. And some people even have special bags for their dogs or other animals to carry—or be carried in! (By now, there should be a crowd up front and a number of people lifting their bags from their seats.) Are your bags already full of things? (You’ll likely hear some “no” replies.) Do you imagine that they might get full one day? Maybe. For this blessing, it doesn’t matter if your bag is full or empty. We’re going to add something to your bag—but don’t worry, because it won’t add any weight and it won’t take up any room. Would any of you like to have some of our congregation’s love to take with you to school, or to work, or on your travels? If you feel love here on Sundays, wouldn’t you like to know that our love is with you on the other days? Let’s do that. Please bundle some love up from wherever you’re storing it (you might rummage through your pockets or look up your sleeves) and make a nice little pillow of love (use your hands, as if making an invisible snowball) and … are you ready? Those of you with your bags, make sure they’re open and hold them up to catch the love! (Gently toss an imaginary bundle of love toward the bags being held open, and encourage the congregation to do the same. Make sure that people toss love toward the bags held up by those seated, as well as toward the front.) That was fun, so let’s add some more qualities to your bags. Sometimes we get nervous when we go to school or work. Sometimes we wish we felt braver. I think it would be nice to know that our courage is with you on days when you need to feel brave. (Again, invite the congregation to “pull out” some courage, to pat it into a “bundle,” and then to gently toss it toward someone’s open bag.) What do you wish we could put in your bag, to take with you? Name it, and we’ll take it from our heart-supply, and we’ll toss it into your bag! (Once or twice more, ask those with bags what they’d like to carry with them. Feel free to combine requests, like “peace and joy.”) Your bag might not look any different or feel any different, but the next time you use your bag I hope you’ll remember that we’ve added our blessings to come with you when you need them. Remember that the Spirit of Life is with you always: at school, at work, on trips, and everywhere, and that this congregation cares about what happens to you no matter where you are. And if you need more love, or courage, or [list one or two of the other things you offered], you can always ask us for more. (If you are distributing tags, keychains, or other emblems to attach to bags symbolizing the congregation’s blessing, distribute them.)