Acknowledgments We have so many people to thank for helping to bring this book into being. We are grateful to the people and communities who inspired our love for rituals: The UU youth and young adult communities who introduced us to one another and taught us that good worship can center ritual instead of a sermon, who encouraged us to experiment with ritual and liturgy, and who gave space to grow as liturgical leaders. Katie Tyson, whose life and love for Unitarian Universalism continues to ignite our own passion for this faith, whose legacy lives on in our lives and in our ministries, and whose death left us with a longing for a container to hold our grief and remember her well. Rev. Leanne McCall Tigert, who taught our Pastoral Care and Counseling with Couples and Families class at Andover Newton Theological School in 2012, where the idea for this book first took shape. All the congregations and communities we’ve served who have generously welcomed our experimentation with rituals in worship and beyond. We are grateful for all of the people who helped turn our dream of a ritual resource book into a reality: The sixty-one contributors who shaped this book through their writing, their experiences, and their love and care for our faith. We thank them for all the wisdom and creativity that they have shared, and for the many emails from us that they responded to over the last four years. Our editors at Skinner House, particularly Mary Benard, who helped imagine the shape of this book and was instrumental in its development, and Larisa Hohenboken, who helped refine everything into its final form. The Skinner House Equity and Accountability Panel, who helped us wrestle with Unitarian Universalism’s legacy of cultural appropriation in rituals. Their insight and thoughtfulness about how to approach this project responsibly made this book so much richer. Rev. Liz Weber, who helped us think about how to more deeply incorporate accessibility into the book and the rituals. Rev. Aisha Ansano, who helped to ground the practice of these rituals in covenant, offering insight into how to use these sacred words and acts with care. We are grateful for our colleagues and friends who supported us along the way: Our favorite Facebook group, the 20s & 30s Women+ Ministers, who have been an invaluable source of emotional and practical support. Thank you for cheering us on, for brainstorming terminology for everything from ritual participants to liturgical elements, and for doing important scientific candle floating tests when we were away from our candle stash. Our many colleagues and friends who have encouraged us, listened when challenges arose, believed in us even before we ourselves did, and reminded us of the need for this book in our world. And finally, we are grateful for our families and households who accompanied us steadfastly on this journey, offering listening, encouragement, hours and hours of childcare, cozy snuggles, and inspiration, and who, most of all, loved us through this process: Tristan, Olympia, and Hosea. Justin, Keyes, Em, Rebecca, Alec, Matt, Evan, Micah, Amy, and Sharon.