For Honoring Elders Rev. Tom Capo and Martha Kirby Capo This ritual is written to honor our elders and is designed to be used as part of a congregational worship service. It was designed after one of the authors spent two years leading a Conscious Aging group, in which he actively listened and learned about the experiences of aging in a youth-oriented society. He collaborated with his wife, an established writer and author, to create this ritual. Materials □ Altar table □ Roses in full bloom, one for each focus person □ Vase large enough to hold roses □ Scarves, one for each focus person □ Copies of the statement of intention, statement of losses, and statement of gains, one of each for each focus person □ Optional: Copies of the unison responses Setup Announce this ritual to the congregation several weeks in advance so that those who wish to be honored can let the leader know. Elders will self-identify. Let them know that they will be invited to share one legacy they wish to pass on. Ask them to prepare this ahead of time and to keep it to one or two sentences. Although it is not absolutely necessary, consider pairing this ritual with a half-day retreat ahead of time in which the focus people identify which aspects of their lives becoming an elder means setting down, and which it means taking up. If you do this, present the scarves to them at its close; ask them to put their scarf in a place where they can see it daily and contemplate what they’ve discerned during the retreat. They should then bring their scarves to the worship service. It’s a good idea to have a few extra scarves and roses on hand for any elders who decide on the spot that they want to be focus people (and any retreat participants who may forget to bring their scarf). Prepare copies of the focus people’s statements; use a large font and easily readable design. Decide whether participants will read their unison responses or repeat them after you, and prepare copies of the responses if necessary; distribute them at the beginning of the worship service. The ritual is placed in the worship service wherever a child dedication, bridging ceremony, or new member recognition is usually placed. Place the altar table in front of the congregation, and set the vase filled with roses on it. Reserve seats for the focus people; if they don’t already have scarves, do so by placing the scarves on them. Place some chairs at the front of the space for any focus people who may prefer to sit rather than stand during the ritual. Script Opening Words As we move into this time of honoring and expressing gratitude for our elders, I offer these words from Cathy Carmody, written during a Choosing Conscious Elderhood retreat in British Columbia, in August 2012: Leaving behind my journey of struggling and racing through the white water of many rivers, I become the river, creating my own unique way. Leaving behind my self-imposed role as a tree upon which others have leaned, I now become the wind, with the freedom to blow whenever and wherever I choose. Leaving behind the boxes I’ve created in my life, crammed with roles, responsibilities, rules and fears, I become the wild and unpredictable space within which flowers sprout and grow. Leaving behind the years of yearning for others to see me as somebody, I soften into becoming my future, with permission from SELF to continually unfold as I choose, without concern for how others may see me. Leaving behind years of telling and teaching, I become instead a mirror into which others can peer and view reflections of themselves to consider. Leaving behind the urge to provide answers for others, I become—in the silence of this forest retreat —the question. Leaving behind the rigor of my intellect, I become a single candle in the darkness, offering myself as a beacon for others to create their own path. I become an elder. I invite you now to honor our elders with me. Invitation to Elders I invite the people who think of themselves as elders in our community to please identify yourselves so that we may have the privilege of honoring you. Please come forward with the scarf from your seat, or stay in your seat and wave your scarf at us. (Elders assemble at the front as they are able and willing, holding their scarves.) Responsive Reading (Distribute the statement of intention to the focus people; have a helper deliver copies to any who have stayed in their seats.) Beloved elders, you have come before us this morning so that we, as a congregation, may honor you. I ask you to read aloud the following statement of intention. E LDERS: I realize that I have attained a new stage of life and growth, that of a senior adult, an elder. I want to celebrate this, and I ask that you share this celebration with me. L EADER: If you are willing to share in this celebration with our elders, I invite you to respond, “We are willing.” P ARTICIPANTS: We are willing. L EADER: Even in the earliest days, our ancestors knew that living meant changing. They gazed upon the skies and saw the moon rise, first as new, then as full, then drawing down into the dark. They marked with circles the path of the sun, and crossed the unmarked deserts and seas guided by the sparkling stars. As above, so below. They honored with rites of passage those among their kin who passed the mileposts of this life, with rites to honor birthing, coming of age, marriage, and elderhood. Honored were the elders, those who held the wisdom of the people. They were the teachers, the healers, the diplomats, the sages, the wise ones, the interpreters of the mysteries. It was they who cared for and blessed the dying. It was they who showed in their living and their dying that all life continues, and that death is not to be feared. Much of the power, recognition, and honor once given to older persons has been lost over time, and today many elders are almost invisible in our society. We will not allow that to happen to you, our own beloved elders. And so we acknowledge that we honor and respect all of our elders, and recognize their many gifts to us. I ask each of our elders to now share your name and, if you wish, one legacy you wish to pass on. (Elders speak in turn. Don’t forget to invite any who have remained in their seats to speak as well; have a helper bring them a microphone.) Everyone please join me in thanking them. (You can either have participants read the unison responses in this section aloud or have them repeat each one line by line after you.) P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you for sharing your wisdom with us. We are honored to celebrate this stage of life with you. By your sharing, may we come to better understand our own lives. L EADER [ ADDRESSING ELDERS ]: Entering this stage of life requires that you acknowledge the aspects of your life that are diminishing, the losses that age imposes. Each of you has been given a scarf. As you hold your scarf, take a few moments to consider what has impacted your life as you have grown older. Let your scarf be a tangible symbol of the losses imposed on you through aging. When you have all done this, I invite you to honor your losses together. (Pause for a few moments, then invite the elders to recite.) E LDERS: I lay down the appearance of youth, for gray hair and wrinkles are fast overtaking me. I lay down the energy and strength I once had and enjoyed, for the aches and pains of my age are making themselves felt now. I lay down the privilege I have enjoyed of thinking far into the future, dreaming of what I might become, for the days to come are fewer for me now, and I must seize what the present has to offer me. (Elders lay their scarves on the table.) P ARTICIPANTS: We honor your strength, your wisdom, and your envisioning. By your sharing, may we come to better understand our own lives. L EADER [ ADDRESSING ELDERS ]: As we honor your losses, so too we honor the new seeds you are yet planting for future harvest. And so I ask, what do you take up at this stage in your life? Please pick up a rose as you honor the things you gain. (Each elder picks up a rose.) E LDERS: I take up confidence, knowing that I have overcome many obstacles and survived many trials in my lifetime. Though none may know the measure of their days, I will move forward and be of help to others in my life. I take up optimism, knowing that there are many good days and good times to come, and I can make my corner of the world brighter and better for those whose lives I touch. I take up the wisdom that I have gained through the many life experiences that have influenced who I have become. P ARTICIPANTS: We honor your strength, your wisdom, and your envisioning. By your sharing, may we come to better understand our own lives. L EADER [ ADDRESSING CONGREGATION ]: [If appropriate, begin with “When children are dedicated in this congregation we offer them a rose, as a symbol of their unfolding life and beauty.”] You who are elders are now in full and glorious bloom. May this rose, symbol of the richness of your life experiences, remind you that every day you live, you leave a legacy. You have become the wild and unpredictable space within which flowers sprout and grow. We are honored to journey with you. P ARTICIPANTS: We will journey beside you in these elder years. We will offer you our support as you face your losses. We will rejoice in your wisdom. And we thank you for what you offer us through your presence in this community. L EADER [ ADDRESSING ELDERS ]: You have chosen the meaning you will make of your aging. May you taste its sweetness in the coming years. We celebrate you today and honor you as elders of [name of congregation]. (Congregation applauds and elders go back to their seats.)