For a New Year Rev. Tandi Rogers This is a reflection ritual to help participants focus their intentions for the coming year. This ritual can be done solo or in a small group. The candle collage was inspired by an exercise the author created for a youth leadership school. After an especially busy year, she wanted a way for her family to talk about all the changes they were going through, and this ritual emerged. It’s become an annual event for them. Materials □ Chalice □ Small table for chalice and completed candles □ Tables for crafting □ Pillar candles in plain glass holders, one for each participant □ Art supplies: glass or acrylic paint, tracing paper, tissue paper, permanent markers, pictures and words cut out of magazines, etc. □ Scissors and glue □ Guiding questions, either posted where everyone can see them or on handouts □ Optional: Music Setup If you are doing this ritual for a group, you will need two spaces very near each other: an intimate space where people can sit in a circle around a small table and chalice, and a separate crafting space. Make the crafting space inviting, ensuring that people have room to lay out materials and plan their candle art. Place a variety of art supplies on each table, with scissors and glue within reach, and a candle at each seat. Make sure table surfaces are protected appropriately. Encourage people to wear clothing that can get glue or paint on it. Perhaps have ambient music set up to create mood. To honor that some people are internal processors and appreciate ample time to think through the prompts, send the guiding questions out with the invitation. If the group is very music-oriented, when inviting them you may ask that they each send you two or three songs to invite in a fresh new year. From their suggestions you could make a playlist to offer up while people are working on their candles. When setting this up for a group, invite people who may need some help maneuvering craft tools to sit by you. That way you can offer aid as requested. Script (Gather people in the intimate space first for an opening reflection.) Opening Words Welcome to a ritual of making New Year’s candles to guide our intentions on this fresh year. The New Year can bring a mixture of emotions and memories. Some people have experienced the best year ever, and some have crawled across the finish line. The freshness of a clean slate brings hope for things to get better. Chalice Lighting “On the Brink of a New Year” (Lois Van Leer) We light this chalice on the brink of a new year Letting go of what has been Open and hopeful for what may come Renewed, restored, ready To live life fully anew May we move forward with intention. (Light the chalice.) Crafting We’re going to hear some guiding questions, and then we will move over to the sacred tables of craft supplies, where you will have a full hour to paint, glue, glitter, collage—however your intention for the New Year is calling to be expressed. And then we will meet back here for some closing sharing. We will go around the circle, each person who wishes to taking a turn reading one of the guiding questions, with ample time after each question for inspiration to arise. If you prefer not to read aloud, just say “Pass.” Feel free to jot down ideas as they come, but please don’t answer aloud at this time. (Invite someone to start by reading the first question aloud. After they finish, pause for a few moments and then invite the next person to read. After a few questions, you will probably not need to prompt further readers.) • What are you looking forward to this year? • What is something new you want to try this year? • This time next year, what do you want to have accomplished? What impact do you want to have made? • What do you need to learn? • What do you need to let go of? • Who do you need to partner with? • Who is your posse, the people you can count on? • What ancestor or ancestors, familial or spiritual or cultural, will you call upon? • What is your spiritual replenishment plan? What will you do when your spiritual well is dry? How will you keep yourself spiritually nourished? • What do you want to ask of the Universe or the God of your understanding? We will meet back here with our candles at [one hour from now]. (Decide as a group whether you will work in silence or welcome light conversation. You may or may not want to put soft, instrumental music on in the background. Leave the chalice lit, as the creation of the candles is part of the ritual. After an hour is up, invite people to place their candle in a circle around the chalice.) Sharing What came up for you? Who would like to share your candle with us first? As you pick up your candle, please light it from the light of the chalice. You can share what came up from a few guiding questions, or talk about your intention for the New Year. You can share as much as you like—and you may also pass, and just light your candle without saying anything. (People share as they are moved. As the leader, make it clear through your modeling that silence is holy and welcome before and after sharings, and instead of speech.) Chalice Extinguishing (After everyone who wishes to has shared, extinguish the chalice with these words.) This chalice flame has become many. May the community, inspiration, and intention of this time be embodied by our individual candles. May we take these candles and incorporate them into our individual spiritual practices that guide our living—living with courage, clarity, love, grace … and with what other qualities, friends? [Incorporate words offered up.] May it be so. Amen.