For a Blended Family Rev. Heather Concannon This ritual marks the blending of two families into one. It is intended to be used as a component of a full wedding or commitment ceremony. Materials □ Altar table □ Two vessels of water, one provided by each family (preferably water from a place that is special to that family) □ Larger vessel to hold the blended water Setup Create an altar table with the three vessels, two filled with water and one empty when the ceremony begins. This ritual should be personalized to reflect each family’s specific circumstances. In particular, discuss with the participants ahead of time how they plan to use the blended water—to water a plant at home, to use in another ritual, etc.—so that you can mention this in the ritual. Script Opening Words [Name 1] and [Name 2], You come here today Not as sole individuals, But as members of families and communities. You come as parents, you come [widowed, separated, divorced], You come as friends, as children, as members of a larger community, an interdependent web. Today is a day we celebrate the love and commitment which has brought you together And the journeys that have brought you to this day. Whatever places your journeys have taken you, Whatever feelings have been your companions on the journey to this day, We invite all of you—[Name 1] and [Name 2], and especially [Children’s names]— To bring your whole selves to this new manifestation of family that we celebrate and honor today. To bring your whole selves means bringing all of who you are: All of the stories, All of the emotions, All of the loss and the change and the joy, And all of the people Who have made this day and these families coming together possible. Water Ceremony And so, To honor the paths you have taken to arrive at this moment And to honor the blending of these two families into something new, We’d like to invite you now to participate in a water ceremony To mark the merging of separate journeys and lives Into a shared journey, shared life, shared family. We use water because it is the very essence of life. It is common, Yet it is also so miraculous. Water is refreshing, cleansing, nourishing, soothing, healing, powerful, sometimes overwhelming. Water represents our humanness: Our tears of joy and frustration, tears of sorrow and of laughter. Water sustains life, And, like streams feeding into a larger river, It represents our separate journeys merging into one. And today, this water becomes holy by our shared intention And by our blessing it together. It becomes holy by our bringing each of our separate journeys And choosing to share them with one another, With intention and love. And so, today we use water taken from [describe the source and meaning of each family’s water] And we pour it into one shared vessel Which they will [describe how the blended family will use the blended water]. And we invite you now To come forward And share your separate waters, merging them into one shared future. (All participants, both children and parents, come forward and pour a small amount of the water from their original family’s vessel into the shared, larger vessel. If some family members are unable to do so, they could all could put a hand on the vessel while one of them pours.) I invite [Name 1] and [Name 2] to hold this water, and [Children’s names] to gather around it and place a hand on the water for a moment of blessing. (If the partners are not able to hold the vessel, they could place their hands on it and have the children place their hands on them.) Blessing Let us bless this water together, As we bless the merging and mingling Of your lives together: [name all the participants, being careful not to group members of an original family together]. Bless the fullness of the journeys that have led you to this joyous day. Bless the tears, both of sadness and of joy. May this water represent both the winding rivers of the past That have brought you to this moment And the present moment, as you enter a shared future. May it bless you with a future of hope, connection, and love As you continue to create family together.