For Adoption Rev. Christina Leone-Tracy This ritual marks the finalization of an adoption. It is meant to be used by the family (and close community, if desired) of the adopted child, including most centrally the child themselves. The script assumes one child and multiple parents and family members, but it can be easily adapted to suit single parents, several children being adopted at the same time, and other variations. It has two versions: one for when the biological or first family is willing and able to participate (whether in person, online, or by sending written messages), and one for when it is not possible or desirable for the biological or first family to participate. (Note that the family of the child’s biological origin is called the “first family” here. Families may use or prefer different terms: “first,” “biological,” “bio,” “birth,” or something else. The word real should never be used for either the first family or the adoptive family. Both are real.) This ritual can be held in the family’s home, outdoors, or in a sanctuary or other sacred space, though it is unlikely to be part of a worship service. The author of this ritual is a mother to two children through the gift of adoption. She reached out to, and is grateful for the input and editing of, UUs and others who themselves were adopted or are first parents, including the first mothers of her children. While some requested to remain anonymous, the following contributors wished to be acknowledged for their input in the creation of this ritual: Kent Doss, Katie Gilroy, Robin Tanner, Corey Torres, and Marlene Walker. Materials □ Chalice □ Tea lights □ Four votive candles □ Additional candle for the adopted child, if they are old enough and willing to participate □ Small table or other place for chalice and candles □ Taper candle □ Optional: Photos of child and family (including the first family, if possible and appropriate) Setup This ritual is intended to be led by a minister, religious leader, or other representative of the adoptive family’s faith community. As leader, you should carefully review the script in advance with the family to determine which version you will use and what changes, if any, need to be made to accommodate the number of participants and the presence or absence of the first family or others. If family members want to add any additional words of promise to the child beyond the “I do” and “I will” statements in the script, there is time for them to do so either during the ritual or in the form of a letter which will be presented to the child and read in private by the family when they are ready. Each participating family member, whether they are adoptive, first, or extended family, needs to decide whether and how they wish to make those promises, and come prepared with their words or letter. The ritual assumes that the child being adopted is too young to actively participate. However, it does include an optional line at the end for an older child who would like to participate. Work with the child and family to find words that feel most fitting to their feelings and circumstances. If the first family is participating, find out ahead of time how they and the adoptive family want them to be identified and described. This ritual relies on candle lighting. If a participant will have difficulty holding or lighting a candle, someone else can help them or do it for them. Set up the table, chalice, candles, and photos or other objects as desired. Script IF THE FIRST FAMILY IS PARTICIPATING Opening Words Today we gather, a beautiful and beloved community, brought together by love: brought together by our love for this child, whose very life brings blessing and widens the circle of family. We gather to honor the love we each have for [Child’s name] and to commit ourselves to their continual growth and connection. Chalice Lighting The first love we honor, the spark, comes from [Name(s) of first family], [Child’s name]’s [identify the relationships of the family members present: birth mother, uncle, etc.]. We light our chalice flame with words to honor that spark and that love. F IRST FAMILY: We light this chalice flame as a symbol of the life and love we gave to [Child’s name]. May this light burn brightly, fueled by our love and the love of everyone who holds this child in their heart. (The first family lights the chalice.) L EADER: We acknowledge the flame of our chalice as the flame ignited and sustained by love. We recognize that, like the flame of a candle, love that is shared is only expanded and never diminished. May our love in this circle do the same for [Child’s name], so that they may always feel confident in the love and commitment of family in their life. Naming Who gave this child their name? N AMING PARENTS: We did. L EADER: And what name did you give this child? (The naming parents give the child’s full name. They may also want to say something about it or why they chose it.) Pledges of Love and Support Our commitment to [Child’s name] is lifelong. As we help them to grow, we honor the complexity of feelings, questions, hopes, and longings that will arise in them. I ask you, then, each to make a pledge to [Child’s name] on this day, as we expand the circle of love and light around them. Do you, [Adoptive parents’ full names], promise to care for, support, and love this child unconditionally, throughout their life, and wrap them fully into the circle of your family? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We do. (The adoptive parents may speak additional words of promise, or present the child with a letter to be read when the family is ready, in private.) L EADER: Do you promise to support [Child’s name]’s unfolding identity, and honor their search for their own path? Do you commit to maintaining an open relationship with their first family, in whatever ways are possible, throughout [Child’s name]’s life? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We do. L EADER: Then please light a candle, symbolic of the love you have for [Child’s name], which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (The adoptive parents light a votive off the chalice flame.) Do you, [First family’s full names], promise to love this child unconditionally throughout their life, and offer your support as needed to their adoptive family? F IRST FAMILY: We do. L EADER: Do you promise to support [Child’s name]’s unfolding identity, and honor their search for their own path? Do you commit to maintaining an open relationship and free exchange of information with [Child’s name], in whatever ways are possible, as they grow? F IRST FAMILY: We do. (The first family may speak additional words of promise, or present the child with a letter to be read when the family is ready, in private.) L EADER: Then please light a candle, symbolic of the love you have for [Child’s name], which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (The first family lights a votive off the chalice flame.) I turn now to the extended community: siblings, grandparents, friends. Do you, also, promise to love this child, unconditionally, throughout their life, and offer your support as needed to them and their family? E XTENDED COMMUNITY: We do. L EADER: Do you promise to support [Child’s name]’s unfolding identity, and honor their search for their own path? Do you commit to providing a safe place for their questions, hopes, and concerns? E XTENDED COMMUNITY: We do. (A representative of the extended community may speak additional words of promise, or present the child with a letter to be read when the family is ready, in private.) L EADER: Then I ask [name of the extended community’s representative and their relation to the child] to please light a candle, symbolic of the love you all have for [Child’s name], which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (The representative of the extended community lights a votive off the chalice flame.) L EADER: On behalf of this whole community, I promise to love and support [Child’s name], their family, and their unfolding identity and to honor their inherent worth and dignity and free and responsible search for truth and meaning throughout their life. I will light a candle in honor of our faith community and the love we have for this child, which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (Light a votive off the chalice flame.) Optional Affirmation by Adopted Child [Child’s name], as you see here, you are so deeply loved, by everyone in the circle of your family. They have promised to love you, support you, and honor your questions as you get older. As a symbol of the circle of love, of which you are a part, and the love shared by all members of this family, will you light the final candle in this circle? C HILD: I will. (The child lights a final votive candle off the chalice flame.) Closing Words The love surrounding [Child’s name] is evident. May it always light the path for them to find their way forward. Our prayer for each member of this family is that they may always know and feel their connection and belonging, interconnected through the complexity of adoption. We honor those promises that were made today, to and with [Child’s name], and we pray for the lifelong growth and deepening of those commitments, through all the joys and challenges that are to come. (Warm your hands over each of the votive and chalice flames, and place your warmed hands on the child’s head and heart.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish these flames, but not the love they represent. May the lights kindled through this adoption continue to burn brightly, and the warmth of the love they represent always be felt by [Child’s name], all the days of their life. Amen. (Extinguish the candle flames, beginning with the chalice.) IF THE FIRST FAMILY IS NOT PARTICIPATING (Adoption sometimes comes after a long, painful struggle that may include abuse or trauma in a first family. If this is the case, mention of the first family must be carefully handled. The role of the first family’s representative in this script may be played by one or more of the adoptive parents, or by someone else. If the child is old enough, follow their lead in choosing a representative and developing words that might be useful and healing.) Opening Words Today we gather, a beautiful and beloved community, brought together by love: brought together by the love for this child, whose very life brings blessing and widens the circle of family. We gather to honor the love we each have for [Child’s name] and to commit ourselves to their continual growth and connection. Chalice Lighting If the story of the first family is not painful The first love we honor, the spark, comes from [Child’s name]’s first family. While they are not physically present in this circle, we light our chalice flame with words to honor that spark of life and the loving choice they made through adoption. If the story of the first family is painful [Child’s name], across generations extraordinary gifts were implanted in your very bones, as dust from the stars. We acknowledge this ancestral and ancient spark, even as we bear witness to the long journey to this day. R EPRESENTATIVE OF THE FIRST FAMILY: I light this chalice flame as a symbol of [Child’s name]’s life, whose spark was born in the body of [their birthing parent] [Use whatever term is preferred by the family; if the birthing parent’s name is known and the family wishes, name them.] May this light burn brightly, as [Child’s name]’s life continues to grow. (The representative lights the chalice.) L EADER: We acknowledge the flame of our chalice as the flame ignited and sustained by love. We recognize that, like the flame of a candle, love that is shared is only expanded and never diminished. May our love in this circle do the same for [Child’s name], so that they may always feel confident in the love and commitment of family in their life. Naming Who gave this child their name? (The adoptive parents answer “We did,” or “Their first mother did,” or whatever is the case.) L EADER: And what name was given to this child? (The adoptive parents give the child’s full name. They may also want to say something about it.) Pledges of Love and Support L EADER: Our commitment to [Child’s name] is lifelong. As we help them to grow, we honor the complexity of feelings, questions, hopes, and longings that will arise in them. I ask you, then, each to make a pledge to [Child’s name] on this day, as we expand the circle of love and light around them. Do you, [Adoptive parents’ full names], promise to care for, support, and love this child, unconditionally, throughout their life, and bring them fully into the circle of your family? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We do. (The parents may speak additional words of promise, or present the child with a letter to be read when the family is ready, in private.) L EADER: Do you promise to support [Child’s name]’s unfolding identity, and honor their search for their own path? Do you commit to remaining open about their adoption story, in whatever ways are possible, throughout [Child’s name]’s life? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We do. L EADER: Then please light a candle, symbolic of the love you have for [Child’s name], which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (The adoptive parents light a votive off the chalice flame.) We acknowledge that [Child’s name]’s first family is not in this circle. But we honor the role they had in creating their life. Do you promise to honor your child’s identity and culture of origin, in whatever ways are possible, throughout their life? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We do. Omit or adapt the following section if mention of the first family is painful or traumatic L EADER: Will you support [Child’s name] in whatever path they wish to follow as they grow, neither forcing reconnection with their first family nor denying them the chance to seek it if they so choose? A DOPTIVE PARENTS: We will. L EADER: Then please light a candle, symbolic of [Child’s name]’s ties to their first family, which are not visible in this circle. We acknowledge the love which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (The adoptive parents light a votive off the chalice flame.) I turn now to the extended community: siblings, grandparents, friends. Do you, also, promise to love this child, unconditionally, throughout their life, and offer your support as needed to them and their family? E XTENDED COMMUNITY: We do. L EADER: Do you promise to support [Child’s name]’s unfolding identity, and honor their search for their own path? Do you commit to providing a safe place for their questions, hopes, and concerns? E XTENDED COMMUNITY: We do. (A representative of the extended community may speak additional words of promise, or present the child with a letter to be read when the family is ready, in private.) L EADER: Then I ask [name of the extended community’s representative, and their relationship to the child] to please light a candle, symbolic of the love you all have for [Child’s name], which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (A representative of the extended community lights a votive off the chalice flame.) L EADER: On behalf of this whole community, I promise to love and support [Child’s name], their family, and their unfolding identity and to honor their inherent worth and dignity and free and responsible search for truth and meaning throughout their life. I will light a candle in honor of our faith community and the love we have for this child, which only grows and never diminishes in its sharing. (Light a votive candle off the chalice flame.) Optional Affirmation by Adopted Child [Child’s name], as you see here, you are so deeply loved. These people, your family, have promised to love you, support you, and honor your questions as you get older. As a symbol of the circle of love, of which you are a part, and the love shared by all members of this family, will you light the final candle in this circle? C HILD: I will. (The child lights the final votive candle off the chalice flame.) Closing Words The love surrounding [Child’s name] is evident. May it always light the path for them to find their way forward. Our prayer for each member of this family is that they may always know and feel their connection and belonging, interconnected through the complexity of adoption. We honor those promises that were made today, to and with [Child’s name], and we pray for the lifelong growth and deepening of those commitments, through all the joys and challenges that are to come. (Warm your hands over each of the votive and chalice flames, and place your warmed hands on the child’s head and heart.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish these flames, but not the love they represent. May the lights kindled through this adoption continue to burn brightly, and the warmth of the love they represent always be felt by [Child’s name], all the days of their life. Amen. (Extinguish the candle flames, beginning with the chalice.)