For Life Transitions for a Person with Intellectual Disability and/or Autism Spectrum Disorder Li Kynvi and Rev. Elea Kemler In honor of Lars and Caleb, and in memory of Steven This ritual marks a significant life transition or occasion, such as moving, leaving school, or beginning work, for a person with intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Since the range of intellectual disability and ASD is so wide, the ritual offers options and guiding questions for leaders to consider as they construct what’s meaningful and possible for their situation. It is designed for participants who are special to the focus person, but offers suggestions for adapting it to a congregational setting. Elea Kemler has a young adult child with ASD and Li Kynvi has one with profound intellectual and physical disabilities. Materials □ Chalice □ Recorded music □ Meaningful gift symbolizing the place or people the focus person is leaving □ Meaningful gift symbolizing the place or people the focus person is going to □ Short fun song for closing □ Cake, snacks, or other party food Setup This ritual needs ample space for the dancing and the transition path. Chairs and spots for wheelchairs can be set in a large circle to begin, with these elements happening in the middle of the circle and participants then returning to the outer circle for the ending, but many other setups are possible. Design the space in a way that suits your context and the focus person’s circumstances and preferences. In particular, consider placing yourself directly in front of the focus person, speaking right to them. Since directionality of address is an important sensory factor, this arrangement might be best for them. If this means that you have your back turned to some other participants, that’s all right, though you may want to use a microphone to be sure everyone can hear you well. Be careful not to speak in the singsong manner typically used with young children. Use adult vocal inflection, even if you need to simplify your language. For focus persons with significant intellectual disabilities, repetition is key. In the weeks leading up to the ritual, talk with them not only about the upcoming transition itself, but also about the celebration that will take place. Perhaps share with them the opening words that will be used, play the song that will be played, talk about the important people who will be there to help them move forward with their life. Consider incorporating words from the closing prayer into their daily rituals, as appropriate. Preparing the focus person by using language from elements of the ritual will help ground them in it, making it familiar, personal, and safe. Make sure the ritual incorporates music or items that they find comforting and enjoyable. There is always a chance that the focus person will opt out of all or some of the plans. This may be more likely if they have ASD. Have a backup plan that simply creates a celebratory atmosphere where people can have fun together in a way that is tolerable for the focus person, and in which they feel honored. Adapt in the moment to what the focus person needs; flexibility is key. A focus person with ASD may not be comfortable making consistent eye contact. This does not mean they are not paying attention. You can look directly at them whether or not they are meeting your eyes. If the focus person has visual impairments, you may need to clearly describe everything that is happening. They may want to feel or handle items that are being used in the ritual. In general, emphasize senses and sensory experiences in the ritual that are significant to the focus person. Some people will benefit from sensory supports that help them feel settled and well organized, especially in highly charged situations when they are the center of attention. This could be a weighted blanket, a fidget, or having someone they know and trust near them and offering comfort. They might like to have a printed copy of song lyrics or the ritual’s text. For the music, choose an upbeat song that the focus person likes to move or dance to. Think about where you will place the player; the music should be audible but not overwhelming. Consider talking beforehand with attendees who might not be naturally inclined to dance or sing, explaining how meaningful their participation would be to the focus person. When participants understand that this is an opportunity for them to deepen their connection with the focus person, the ritual is more meaningful for them as well. Think about how those lining the path should interact with the focus person as they move along it. The script offers some suggestions. The focus person’s family and loved ones will have their own work of transition to do. Keep in mind that this ritual centers the needs of the focus person. Especially if you end up using your backup plan, their loved ones may need their own, separate ritual of transition. The script offered here assumes a family setting, but if the focus person attends religious services regularly and feels comfortable and at ease there, and if they will be able to continue to attend after their transition, then it would be appropriate to incorporate this ritual into a congregational worship service. The people most significant to them should stand at the beginning and end of the path, and congregation members can line up between them. During the ritual, mention that [church, synagogue, etc.] will stay the same. Congregants can join in the singing, encouragement, chanting, and warm wishes. Script (This sample script assumes that the focus person is moving from their mother’s home to a group home. Adapt it as needed, using your creativity and specific circumstances.) Chalice Lighting (If the focus person needs additional support to orient themselves to what’s happening, perhaps introduce the chalice lighting by saying, “Just like we do when we’re in church, we are going to start by lighting a chalice together and saying the words that go with it.” If they regularly attend church services in which specific opening or chalice lighting words or music are used consistently, consider using them here, as well.) We gather on this important day So we can be together to celebrate [Name]. We light this chalice full of hope and love. It is good to be together. (Light the chalice. If a sibling or other family member wants to participate but isn’t comfortable speaking, they could light it. The focus person could also light it themselves.) Opening Words Welcome, welcome, welcome! We are so happy to be together for this big day. We all have lots of regular days in life, and a few special days. This is a special day because today we celebrate [Name] as they move from living with their mother, [Mother’s name], to living in a residential community on Strom Street. Sometimes special days can feel like a little too much. If you start to feel like it’s too much, find a way to let us know and we will slow it down, or quiet down, or take a break. It’s normal to have lots of different feelings on big days. We might feel happy, sad, nervous, shy, maybe even mad sometimes. Or we might feel more than one thing at the same time. It’s all okay; all the feelings are okay to have. Today we feel super proud of [Name] and happy for you, and we want to celebrate this big move together! Now let’s listen and dance to one of [Name]’s favorite songs. [Name the song.] Feel free to sing along! (If the focus person startles easily, say explicitly, “I’m going to start the music now” or have them start it themselves.) Music and Movement (Play the music and encourage everyone to mingle, dancing and singing in whatever way works for them and interacting with the focus person in ways that person treasures.) (If the focus person is a wheelchair user who does not propel their chair independently, remember that that chair can dance too! If they enjoy it, take the brakes off and dance and spin them.) Path of Transition This is a special time in your life, [Name]! We will make a path for you to move through now, to show how you’re moving from home with Mama to home on Strom Street. You’ve been home with Mama for [number] years now, since you were a baby! At home with Mama, you like to [swing on the porch, play with the dog, sing with the ukulele, etc.]. And you spend time with [name the people the focus person lives with, and any other people they frequently see—other family members, neighbors, teachers, etc.—who are participating in the ceremony]. All these people are going to stand over here. (Have these people stand together on one side of the space, holding or displaying the gift that symbolizes what the focus person is leaving.) (If there’s a logical comparison available that can help the focus person understand, consider using it. For instance, “Just like your sister moved and now she lives at her school, you are growing up too, and it’s your turn now.”) (A parent, guardian, or caregiver can express their love and reassure the focus person about things that will remain the same. They might say something like, “I have loved you every minute I have known you, and I will keep on loving you. We have always had a ukulele at home, and here is a new one you can take with you to your new home on Strom Street. Your friends there can play ukulele with you, and I will play with you when I visit! Lots of other things will stay the same too. You will still get to eat mac’n’cheese and goldfish crackers and wear your favorite soft sweatshirt.” They should give the focus person the gift that symbolizes what the person is leaving.) The time for living at home with Mama is finished now. The time for living on Strom Street is starting. (Describe clearly what is to come, with specific sensory details. For instance, “On Strom Street your room is at the end of the hall, and Pedro will be with you! You go by the bubbling fish tank and Tyler’s room on your way there. All your favorite music and clothes will be there for you, and your posters will be on the walls.” Name the people who will be entering the focus person’s life, and have the ones who are present stand on the other side of the space, across from the first group, holding or displaying the gift that symbolizes what the focus person is going to. Say something like “Courtney and Angel, who you met when you visited Strom Street, are here with us now. They have a new quilt for your bed in your new room!”) (Have both groups, along with others who may be participating, form two lines facing each other, creating a path from the old location to the new one. If possible, place people from where the focus person is leaving at the beginning of the path, those whose role or presence will remain largely unchanged—extended family, church and school friends, etc.—in the middle, and those from where the focus person is going on the far end, holding the arrival gift.) So now you get to move through the path we made for you, just like you are moving from home with Mama to home on Strom Street. Here you go! (As the focus person moves along the path, have the people lining it interact with them in the way that suits the focus person best. For instance, if they like the sound of cheering and yelling, each person could begin chanting their name as they pass by, so that by the end everyone is chanting together and then breaking into cheers. If that much noise would be overwhelming, each participant could murmur a word of encouragement as the focus person goes by. If they like to be touched, each participant could hold their hand or pat them on the back. Consider other ways to enhance the focus person’s experience of walking the path as well. If they enjoy the feeling of wind in their face, put a fan at the end of the path, blowing toward them; if they like pretty rocks or flowers, line the path with them or pile them at the end.) (If the pressure and attention are too much, the focus person may want to move down the line as quickly as possible, or not participate at all. Be prepared to shift smoothly to your backup plan, and make sure that everyone knows that doing so is just fine.) Focus Person’s Expression (This is a time for the focus person to express anything they might want to. They might do so in words, whether spoken in the moment, prerecorded, or read for them by someone else. If the focus person is nonverbal, they might use a voice output device. If they don’t engage at all with symbolic language, they could dance or blow bubbles! You could play a recording of them vocalizing, show a video of them doing something fun, or show photos of them through the years, with music and a little narration.) Regathering [Name], we are so proud of you and we love you so much! (Summarize the ritual that just happened in reassuring language: “We came together and lit a chalice, we talked about feelings we might have, and we danced and sang to [name of song]. Then we talked about your big move from home with Mama to home on Strom Street. We gave you a new ukulele, and you moved through the path while we said your name over and over! Then you got your new quilt, and you told us you’re excited and a little scared. We get that! We know the people who will be living with you at Strom Street are very kind and you will feel safe and loved there, too.”) Prayer Let’s pray together. (If there is a prayer—embodied or in words—that has long been a part of the focus person’s life, use that here. Otherwise, address the Divine with whatever name or term is most familiar to the focus person: Spirit of Life, Loving God, etc.) What a joy it is to be together on this special day! We are so thankful for each other and for [Name]. This is a big change. [Name for the Divine], help us through it. Be with [Name] in the mornings, in the afternoons, and at night. Bring [Name] a feeling of love and belonging, no matter what. Thank you! Amen. (If the focus person likes to be touched, it will be very important during the prayer for those close to them to touch or hold them in whatever way is customary and calming for them.) Chalice Extinguishing Now let’s blow out the chalice and sing our last song before we have cake! (Extinguish the chalice.) (Sing a short, fun song the focus person enjoys.) Thank you, everyone, for coming to celebrate this special day with [Name]!