For Entering and Exiting Silence Rev. Karen G. Johnston This ritual offers a way to intentionally enter and exit a time of sacred silence that might be part of a centering prayer or a meditation retreat. It has a symmetrical form, with participants doing nearly the same actions in exiting as in entering, though in reverse order, enhancing its elegance. It can be done by an individual or, when coordinated, by a group. The author devised this ritual as part of a twelve-day solo meditation retreat informed by somatic healing and Buddhist practices. Materials □ Candle □ Song (preferably one you know by heart) □ Slip of paper with “I choose to enter into silence” written on it in pencil □ Pencil with an eraser □ Chime Setup Set up an altar with the ritual materials. You may want to add others that are important to you. Choose whatever posture (sitting, lying down, standing, swaying, walking around, or something else) helps you to bring your full attention to this ritual, allowing it to wash over you, helping you to move in the liminal spaces between silence and regular life. If you use sign rather than (or in addition to) voice, you can express the song verses with increasing and decreasing emphasis. If you find humming a positive sensation, you can hum. You could also lightly tap a finger on your collarbone, or an open palm gently on your upper chest. Script Entering Companion (For some, entering into silence allows in unwelcome emotions, memories, or projections. It can be helpful to have a friendly or protective companion with us to help us access whatever resilience we need to experience silence as beneficial. A burning candle can be such a companion.) (Light your candle. It may represent someone living or dead or a safe place or space, from either your past or your imagination. You are invited to name it aloud, to welcome your companion and/or express gratitude for their company, bowing to their presence.) Voice (Sing your song. If it has fewer than three verses, repeat one so that you sing at least three. Sing each successive verse more softly (so you might want to start louder than you normally would). Do not sing the final verse aloud. Hum it if humming is comfortable for you; humming can positively activate the vagus nerve, engaging our parasympathetic nervous system to help calm us. If humming does not work this way in your body, trust your body’s wisdom and do not hum. You can express the final verse in some other physical way, such as swaying or tapping.) Vision (Read, silently or aloud, the slip of paper with the words “I choose to enter into silence” on it. At whatever pace you choose, erase the words as an affirmation of this choice. Keep the now-blank slip of paper.) Sound (Ring the chime, at first almost as loudly and quickly as you can tolerate, and gradually softening and slowing down. This may take twenty seconds or five minutes; it is up to you. As the chime sounds, observe the feeling in your hands as you strike it and allow the vibrations, rather than your intellectual thoughts, to be your primary sensation of this experience. See if you can experience the slowing and quieting of the sound of the chime as an invitation to settle your body into the silence.) (It is now time to begin your extended practice of silence.) Exiting (If you want to include your companion candle in the exit ritual, be sure it is lit.) Sound (Begin to ring the chime slowly and softly, gradually speeding up and getting louder until it is almost more than you can tolerate. This may take twenty seconds or five minutes; it is up to you. As the chime sounds, observe the feeling in your hands as you strike it and allow the vibrations, rather than your intellectual thoughts, to be your primary sensation of this experience. See if you can experience the swelling sound as an invitation to exit from the silence, perhaps by moving or shaking your body.) Vision (On the same slip of paper, write the words “I choose to exit from silence” at whatever pace you choose.) Voice (Begin humming your song [unless humming does not feel good to you], then sing it. Repeat verses as necessary so that you sing at least three, with each verse louder than the previous one, perhaps moving or shaking your body at the same time, as a proclamation that you have exited the silence.) Companion (If your friendly candle is still lit, express gratitude for its company, its protection, its witness. Call its name before you blow it out. As you blow it out, use your hands to waft the smoke and heat that are leaving the extinguished wick toward yourself to affirm the connection between you and your companion even as you have exited the silence.)