For Saying Goodbye to a Sacred Space Rev. Tricia Brennan This ritual is designed for congregations who are demolishing a part or all of their building, and it can be adapted for the sale of a building as well. It is appropriate for multigenerational groups. The author is grateful to Louise Marcoux, former director of religious education at the Unitarian Church of Sharon, Mass., with whom she created a number of rituals, including a version of this one. Materials □ Chalice □ Markers of many colors □ Newsprint (if the building is being sold) □ Food and drink □ Small objects to pass while speaking, such as stones, flowers, or ornaments □ Music Setup Arrange several circles of six to eight chairs each, enough for the number of people you anticipate. Depending on who you expect, you may need small chairs for children, or spaces left open for a wheelchair. Put one of the ritual objects in each circle. Decide which walls you will invite people to write and draw on. If the building is being sold and shouldn’t be marked up, cover those walls with newsprint. Set out some simple food and drink. Often a building is being sold or massively renovated because it is not accessible. If accessibility is a problem in your space, try to find ways for anyone who cannot physically access the ritual to participate if they want to. They might ask someone else to share their memories for them in the ritual, or draw or write something in advance that can be taped to the wall, or participate virtually. Script Chalice Lighting This building we are in is made of wood and stone, concrete and glass. Its physicality is apparent. Yet what we don’t see and can’t touch, yet know well, are the countless memories contained here. We light this chalice in gratitude for all that has been in this space and for this time of remembrance we now will share. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words Welcome, everyone. I am so glad you are able to be here as we gather to remember, share, and say goodbye to this [name of building]. Let us begin by recognizing that before there was a church here on this land, and before we were here, the [name of Indigenous people] lived, worked, played, celebrated, worshipped, and died in this region. We and this faith community, [name], came later. [If your community has a standard land acknowledgment, you could use it here instead.] We gather together knowing that this building, which holds many memories for us, will soon be gone. We let it go so that our congregation’s vision of our future can come into being. Sometimes, oftentimes, we can only move forward into our fullness when we let go of things that no longer serve us well. Still, the letting go is a loss. Our time together will make space for that loss, as well as space for gratitude for the many moments of meaning that have occurred within these walls. Our ritual of remembrance will have time for you to be alone and time to be together. There are three parts to this ritual: moving through the space, writing on the walls, and sharing stories. Moving through the Space, Moving through Time First is a quiet journey through the building, letting the building speak to you of what you have experienced here. Go at your own pace, and go wherever you want. You can move through alone or with a friend or family member. If you want to go with others, keep your conversation to a minimum, and speak softly so as not to disturb the remembrances of those nearby. We will gather back here in fifteen minutes. Before journeying, let us sing together “Return Again.” Song “Return Again” (Shlomo Carlebach) (Lead participants in singing the song three or four times. Then allow fifteen minutes for people to move through the building. Once everyone has regathered, continue.) Writing on the Wall (Adapt these instructions if you have posted newsprint on the walls because the building is being sold and shouldn’t be marked up.) Does the idea of writing on a wall intrigue you? We now will get to do something that usually is forbidden, but today is just right. Choose a marker or two and write or draw whatever you want on this wall that has stood the test of time but soon will be no more. Memories from this place, prayers, names of people you’ve known in this community, pictures, hopes for the future. All are encouraged. Know that before the building comes down, we will take photos of what is remembered here, as part of the congregation’s memory treasure trove. We will have fifteen minutes for this drawing and writing. When you’re done, help yourself to something to drink or eat, and take a seat in one of the chairs. (As people write, have quiet music playing.) (Once everyone has finished writing, invite them to sing. If people are taking a very long time or their attention has wandered, you could also use the song as a way to gather them.) Song “Come Sing a Song with Me” (Carolyn McDade) (Lead participants in singing.) Sharing Memories It is good to remember. It is good to capture those memories in writing and pictures. And it is good to listen to and share memories and feelings. When our stories are heard by another, we are listened into a deeper sense of ourselves. When we listen to another’s words, we learn a bit more about the other person, and sometimes find ourselves in their story too. We come to know one another’s minds. We will have thirty minutes to share memories of your time in this building. In each circle of chairs there is a small object—a stone, flower, or ornament—that can be held by each speaker. While that person holds it, the others in the circle should just listen, deeply and caringly. Someone can start, and then pass the object to the person beside them when they’re finished. No one needs to speak if they don’t want to. I will let you know when there are ten minutes left. (Allow thirty minutes for sharing, giving participants a signal when there are ten minutes left and again when it is time to wrap up.) Closing Words I invite you all to gather in a large circle, standing or seated, as you prefer. This has been a rich time of remembering and sharing, a time when I suspect that events, services, conversations, and people came to mind, perhaps from long ago. You may have laughed, you may have cried, you may have felt angry or grateful or pensive. All feelings, all memories are worthy and honored. As we close, I’d ask that we go around the room and each person who wants to can say one or two words that capture a feeling you have, a meaningful memory, a person, an event. Let the chorus of our words be our final prayer. (Allow participants to share one or two words. In a larger group, this sharing could be done popcorn style instead of around the circle.) Song “Part in Peace” (Sarah Flower Adams) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing (The last two lines of this passage are attributed to Dag Hammarsköld.) What is new emerges from what has been. What once was never fully leaves us. Still, it is the old that gives way for the new. For all that has been, Thank You. For all that is to come, Yes! (Extinguish the chalice.)