For Gender Affirmation Surgery Li Kynvi In memory of our trans ancestors for whom surgery was never an option This is a ritual to support and help prepare someone before they undergo gender affirmation surgery. It is designed for the focus person plus one to six people, one of whom is the leader. The ritual has five main elements, each followed by a song; it can be simplified and shortened by abbreviating or omitting one or more elements. The author underwent gender affirmation surgery in June 2021, and this ritual emerged from what they needed at the time and their reflections on the experience since. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Massage oil, hand lotion, or similar (chosen by the focus person) □ Bowl to hold gathered water □ Backup cups of water (in case they’re needed) □ Any meaningful objects the focus person would like to add to the altar □ Optional: Music to supplement or replace live singing Setup Go through the script carefully with the focus person, adapting it as necessary to suit their circumstances and the language they prefer to use. Ask how they want you to describe their upcoming surgery, including what anatomical terms you should use. If they are not comfortable having their hands massaged or their body touched, choose alternative ways for participants and you to interact with them. Give them time to think about what pains and barriers they may want to name aloud in the ritual, in single words or short phrases; possibilities include transphobic insurance companies, racism, isolation, hostility from coworkers or employers, rejection by friends or family, financial worries, and many more. Also invite them to develop an image of themselves that they would like their supporters to hold in mind: something like “Picture me surrounded by beautiful light” or “Imagine me wrapped in a thick soft warm fluffy maroon comforter of love.” Tell participants ahead of time that they will be asked to speak briefly about something that has been important in their relationship with the focus person, and to offer a sentence of celebration and joy about the upcoming surgery. Ask them to come prepared for this, and also to bring about a half cup of water. Before the ritual begins, ensure that everyone remembered to do so; give a cup of water to anyone who forgot. Set a chair for the focus person in the middle of the space, and seat participants around them in a U shape, so that no one is blocked off behind someone else. Put the chalice and bowl on the altar table, directly across from the focus person. Script Chalice Lighting We kindle the flame—transformative energy dancing Held by the chalice—solid supportive context Together marking this time of gathering as sacred. May every beautiful, beloved trans and nonbinary sibling have full access to the medical care and loving support they need. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words As people move through gender transition, we [or “they” if you have not done so yourself] are presented with the intimately personal question “Have I gone far enough with my transition to feel basically whole and at ease in the world?” This question presents itself again and again, and each time there is only one person who can answer it. Sometimes the response is “Yes” or “Yes, for now.” Other times we [or “they”] need to move forward with another aspect of our [or “their”] evolving. We gather today because when you, [Name], have asked that question, your answers have led you to your upcoming surgery on [date]. We celebrate the persistence that brought us to this day, and offer our gratitude for you, for each other, and for living in a place and time in which gender-affirming surgery is a possibility. Being able to decide how you move in the world is a beautiful gift, so important for our thriving. Naming Challenges, Pain, and Oppression First we name the pain you have arrived here with, [Name]. We name the structures of oppression that operate within you, within others, and within our society, and how they have affected you. And we acknowledge your pain as a part of your history, part of our history. Knowing that all of us here are committed to working to dismantle those oppressive systems wherever we recognize them. Knowing we are committed also to turning toward ourselves and each other in compassion. We hope that in this place there is the possibility of healing within ourselves, between each other, and with the wider world. [Name] is going to be sharing some words and gestures. Our role is to pay close attention, and—as a way of holding their expression with them—after each phrase and gesture, to repeat just what they said and did. We don’t add our own spin, or something we want for them. We mirror back just what [Name] says and does, including their tone and energy. [Name], you’ll be naming the pain, challenges, and oppressions you bring to this important moment. You’re welcome to accompany your words with any sounds or gestures that feel right. (If the focus person needs a place to start, suggest that they inhale as they bring their arms up and close to their body, close their fists tightly for a moment, and then exhale while opening their fists and lowering or shaking out their hands.) Participants, remember our job is to offer our full attention and to mirror back what [Name] says and does, including their energy and tone. [Name], take all the space and time you need, and continue until you feel done. (Continue when the focus person has said everything they want to, but do not rush; allow a beat of silence at the end.) Let’s take a cleansing breath together. Feel the weight of your body, your connection to the earth. Song “Gentle Heart” (Jen Myzel) (Lead participants in singing or invite them to listen to the recording.) Acknowledging Relationship We are honored to be by your side, [Name], and we are here today to offer our blessings and to pledge our loving support as you heal. (If it is part of the focus person’s tradition to name important ancestors, do so now, using the language most appropriate to their tradition. Then turn to address the participants.) One at a time we’ll move forward and, using the lotion [Name] chose, we will massage, anoint, or just hold their hands. We’ll each take a couple minutes to briefly share something that has been important to us in our relationship with them, and offer them some words of celebration and joy about their upcoming surgery, before returning to the circle. (Guide participants in this; you may need to gently keep people moving if they have a great deal they want to say.) Song “Sweet Love” (Taya Mâ Shere and Oscar Maynard) (Lead participants in singing or invite them to listen to the recording. If you are singing, sing the song through once as written, then a few times more using the focus person’s name.) [Name], do not play it small The world depends on your greatness (2x) May you be blessed as you go forward (4x) Preparing for Surgery Sweet [Name], it is time for us to offer messages of love and information to your body. So wiggle around until you are as comfortable as possible. In fact, everyone can do this; all of us are invited to participate in this body scan. You are all welcome to move in any way you are called to move. (Pause for a moment as everyone gets comfortable.) Beginning with your scalp, become aware of any tension there And in the area between your hairline and your neck Behind the ears Through the forehead and temples Around the eyes, becoming aware of the little tiny muscles there So many exquisite muscles around the eyes and nose, the mouth and jaw—able to move precisely and with such nuance Becoming aware of these, maybe letting them know they’re welcome to take some time off Feeling into the muscles of the neck, free to move your head Moving down, feeling the muscles across your shoulders and upper back Invite meditative breaths into this area, being aware of your inhaling and exhaling Bringing your awareness into your arms, elbows, wrists, hands, fingers Bringing your breath and awareness more fully into your chest and belly area, your middle and lower back Breathing And down into your butt muscles and further to the large muscles of the thighs Inviting awareness to the area of the knees, backs of knees, calves, ankles, feet, toes, and soles of the feet Then one more breath into the whole, exactly as it is. Let us take this time to prepare your body to receive the surgical procedures it will undergo in [number] days. We acknowledge that part of the body’s job is to protect you and to resist any physical invasion, to fight against anything that could seem like harm. Sacred attention and deep trust in your healing powers underscore everything we say and do here. [Name], I invite you to place your hands on your heart (or on the area of the body where the surgery will occur, if the focus person prefers). We will now come forward and each place one hand on you. (Pause while people surround and touch the focus person. Ensure that the focus person is comfortable with how they are being touched; ask if they would like to adjust the placement of anyone’s hands.) You have invited Dr. [Doctor’s name] to perform a very important operation on you on [day]. In the hour before surgery, your beloveds will be holding you in [prayer, light, love, mind], and you will be preparing by relaxing as deeply and fully as possible. Many medical professionals will be around, asking you questions and taking care of you. Your focus can quietly remain on your internal state, on relaxing, and on opening your body to receive this so wanted and joyous surgery. Your medical team will take excellent care of you, making sure you are safe and that you will feel no pain. You have invited your surgeon to [briefly explain the upcoming surgery]. They will do exactly what you have asked, no more and no less. This surgery is so important and so welcome. We ask that your body, [Name], open to this surgery and the incisions it involves; that it welcome this needed change in your physical being; that it do everything within its power to work with the surgery, support it, and heal from it quickly and fully. On surgery day, about an hour before the scheduled time, we will begin to hold you and the image you have chosen. Can you describe that now with as much sensory detail as you can? [The focus person describes the image they want people to hold of them.) We will hold you and this image in love, and you will hold yourself and this image in love. Your body will remember to work with the surgery, supporting it and healing quickly. In that spirit, let’s sing together “There Is a Love.” Song “There Is a Love” (text by Rebecca Parker, music by Elizabeth Norton) (Lead participants in singing or invite them to listen to the recording.) Offering Blessings We have each arrived here, at this deep well of community, bearing water. We are here to pour our love, respect, blessings, hopes, prayers, and support for you, [Name], into this common bowl. I invite everyone gathered to pour the water they have brought into this bowl, symbolizing the community that surrounds [Name]. (Each person pours water into the bowl.) (Invite the focus person to hold their hands over the bowl. Take some water in your palms or a cup and pour it onto their palms. Then immerse your hands and place your wet palms gently on the focus person’s head.) From these shared waters and this gathered community, we offer these blessings: May your surgeon, anesthesiologist, and entire medical team perform to the best of their abilities, and freely offer you their respect, care, and expertise. May your strong body open and receive this joyful, affirming surgery, healing and renewing at its own pace, deeply integrating its new reality. May you know how loved and affirmed you are—before surgery, during surgery, and after it. May you feel our presence, our strength, and our love all along the way, and be steadied by them. May you open to the ways this operation will change you, both those you have anticipated and those you have not: the ways it will invite you further into your fullness. And may you know you are deeply held in the grace of a larger love that will not let us go, and will not let us let each other go. Song “I Am Light” (India.Arie) (Lead participants in singing or invite them to listen to the recording.) Exchanging Gratitude Our care does not end with this ritual. [Describe here some arrangements that have been made for the focus person’s care, such as “One of us will check in with you this evening, and will be in touch between now and surgery day. [Friend’s name] will pick you up after surgery, bring you home, and stay that first week, and meals will be provided by the folks who signed up.”] The final piece of our ritual is an exchange of gratitude for each other. It is an honor and a blessing to be able to show up for one another. We will [sing, hear] a final song. It is four lines long, and we will repeat it once for each person here. For each repetition, come toward one of us and express and receive the gratitude that flows between you. Then move to the next person as [we sing, it plays] again. When you have exchanged gratitude with all of us, we will [sing it through, hear it] one final time. Song “I Am Saying Thank You” (Judy Fjell) (Lead participants in singing or invite them to listen to the recording.) Chalice Extinguishing As we end, we extinguish the chalice, and carry with us how moving it has been to be a part of this ritual. What a blessing to share this transformative time. May you know, [Name], how very loved you are, and may you feel deep in your bones that supporting you is an honor and a blessing. May the Spirit of Persistent Life and Love stay with you from now through your surgery and healing, and may the blessings of this day resonate long in your heart, ringing a song of deepest affirmation and joy. (Extinguish the chalice.)