Handle with Care Context and Covenant for Rituals By Rev. Aisha Ansano A few years after I became a Unitarian Universalist, I was visiting my mom, and we decided to attend the local UU church for a Sunday morning service. As we walked into the sanctuary, I glanced down at the order of service I had been handed and almost turned around and walked back out—because the service that day was going to be a Kwanzaa service. Why did that make me want to leave? Because, as a multiracial Black woman, I was extremely wary of what a Kwanzaa service might be like in a UU congregation. Even in my limited experience of UU churches, I had all too often witnessed UUs taking customs and rituals that were not theirs and using them as if they were, with no acknowledgment—or even, it seemed, understanding—of the harm this could cause. Using rituals in this way can both dilute their meaning and disrespect the people and culture from which they come. I’d been in worship services where the congregation was invited to sing African American spirituals that were presented without introduction or context, as though they were just fun songs that fit a theme, rather than being deeply rooted in a particular history. I’d watched UUs light the candles of a menorah incorrectly in worship and mispronounce the words of Spanish texts and songs. Often I had wondered if the people attempting these rituals had any relationship with people of the culture or tradition being showcased. And if not, were the rituals being used appropriately, or was something important missing from the observance, since those whose tradition it was weren’t involved? That day, home on vacation and with my mom, I didn’t know if I had the energy to endure more rituals taken out of context. I especially did not want to experience white UUs celebrating Kwanzaa without any relationship to folks who celebrate it as a personal or community practice, or to see a couple of Black folks, whether UUs or members of the wider community, asked to present the holiday like a show and tell, whether or not they actually celebrated it themselves, simply because they were Black. I’m glad I stayed at the church that day. The service was indeed led by Black staff members, congregants, and wider community members—but they were people with personal and familial experience of celebrating Kwanzaa. The white minister shared some reflections about commonalities between the principles of Kwanzaa and the UU principles. It was a truly wonderful and powerful service—but my previous experiences almost made me miss it. Even though I hadn’t been UU for long, I was already weary of Unitarian Universalist appropriation of rituals without cultural context or relationship with their communities of origin. Like many noncreedal spiritual communities, Unitarian Universalism is not devoid of ritual. From weekly practices like lighting the chalice or sharing joys and sorrows to annual rituals like the flower communion and water ceremony, our tradition has a number of rituals grounded in our theology and history, and individual congregations often also have rituals of their own that are rooted in their particular history and community. And it is also true that, as a tradition with historical roots in Christianity but with many members who don’t identify as Christian, we can struggle to discern which rituals from our history still feel like ours. When we yearn for rituals that we aren’t finding in our own tradition, it’s easy to turn to other cultures and religious traditions, to take customs and rituals that speak to us and try to make them our own. It may be a relief to find that a ritual already exists to give us what we are yearning for, to feel that we do not need to create our own from scratch. The long history of a ritual might help it feel even more powerful. When we are longing to remember and honor the people in our lives who have died, it is tempting to reach for established customs such as Dia de los Muertos even if we do not have Mexican heritage, or the yahrzeit even if we do not hold a Jewish identity. These observances already exist, and we know that they are deeply meaningful for many—and so we may convince ourselves that they can be meaningful for us, as well. But the power of these particular rituals is rooted in specific cultural and religious histories and experiences, and if we do not share those, then the rituals are not ours to use. When we choose to use them anyway, whatever our intention, we risk diminishing their meanings and harming the potential relationships between us and those for whom they hold familial, cultural, or religious significance. We can participate in rituals from other cultures and traditions as invited guests, but they are not ours to lead or to adapt to fit our needs. Instead, we must turn to our own rituals—that is part of the goal of this book, to offer rituals grounded in Unitarian Universalism that UUs can use to mark important occasions and moments in their personal and communal lives. And since Unitarian Universalism excludes no one on the basis of belief, readers who are not UU are invited to connect with these rituals as well, and to infuse them with their own traditions—as long as the adaptations they make are consistent with the values and intentions inherent in the original rituals. Using Rituals Responsibly The rituals in this book are being offered as a gift. They exist because people have needed them. And the existence of these rituals—the existence of this book—is proof that we are capable of creating and holding our own rituals. The rituals offered here are grounded in Unitarian Universalism and often use UU symbols and language, but they demonstrate a larger point: whoever we are—Unitarian Universalists, members of another noncreedal faith community, followers of a creedal faith, spiritual but not religious, or entirely secular—we can create rituals that meet our needs and those of our communities. In accepting and using these gifts of ritual, however, it’s important to recognize that some of them were written by and for people with particular experiences and identities. Even if you too are a Unitarian Universalist, that does not mean that you can always freely use work created by and for UUs with marginalized identities simply because you share religious identity. When a transgender UU writes a poem about their experience as a transgender person, it is not an invitation for cisgender UUs to adapt that poem to fit their own identity and experience and then share it in worship. When a Black UU creates a ritual grounded in the Black experience, non-Black UUs should consider how the ritual needs to be contextualized if they use it, and whether they are best suited to lead it. When a UU with a disability writes a reflection on their experiences with welcome—or its lack—in UU spaces, temporarily able-bodied UUs should not use it to talk about other forms of welcome in UU spaces. Whenever you use a ritual in this book, I invite you to think about why its author might have written it, and what it might mean to the community for whom it was written. I hope that, as you dig into the resources offered here, you do so with deep intentionality, respect, and humility. And I hope this book inspires you to create the rituals that you need, that meet your needs and the needs of your communities, grounded in your own religious, spiritual, and/or ethical values. Some of the rituals in this book are meant for small groups, and some are for larger gatherings or congregational worship services. Some focus on a specific individual, while others invite equal participation by everyone present. In smaller gatherings, it is easier for those present to stay in deep relationship with one another, to think and talk through the process and the ritual itself with intentionality, and to hold each other accountable in love. In larger gatherings, such as congregational worship, it can be easier to drift away from the deep relationship and accountability we’d like to have with each other. That’s when it can be particularly easy to use a ritual in a way that might be painful or harmful, however unintentionally. When some participants have not been involved in planning the ritual and discussing its meaning, they may not understand why it is being led in the way that it is, or why certain words or songs are being used and should not be changed. When a ritual is offered to a large gathering, therefore, extra context or framing can be helpful. For instance, the leader could talk about the community from which the ritual emerges or give some background on the songs and readings. Covenant Since we may unintentionally and unconsciously perpetuate harm and replicate systems of oppression, rituals from this book should be planned and led through the lens of the following covenant. This covenant is intended to ground your engagement with these rituals in humility, intention, accountability, and gratitude. As I use the rituals in this book, I covenant to engage with them through the following values: • Humility, acknowledging and sitting with any discomfort that arises. • Intention, giving the rituals my attention and focus, and engaging with them with reverence and respect. • Accountability, learning about and alongside the centered community through relationship and context. • Gratitude, participating in the ritual with appreciation for those who offer it. In preparing to lead a ritual from this book, read through the covenant and share it with everyone involved in the planning and leading of the ritual. If you or someone else has questions about the covenant, create space for a conversation to bring you all to a deeper understanding of it and the values that underlie it. Everyone who is planning or leading the ritual should agree to this covenant and understand what it means. With rituals that are written by and for people with a particular identity or experience, it may make sense to give all participants, not just the planners and leaders, some explanation of the covenant’s values and invite them to engage with the ritual through its lens as well. Humility Approaching these rituals with humility means recognizing that aspects of some of them may make us uncomfortable. Unless the ritual was written by or for those with a marginalized identity that we also hold, the invitation here is to acknowledge and recognize that discomfort and to process it together, without making substantive changes to the ritual. If you are planning to lead the ritual “For Lamenting and Setting Intentions to Heal White Supremacy Culture,” you may want to tell participants that it was adapted from one written for a 2017 campaign by the Unitarian Universalist Association called “The Promise and the Practice of Our Faith” and share with them some of the campaign’s context and history. (Information is included in the ritual’s description.) At the same time, while the words “white supremacy culture” might make you or others uncomfortable, do not remove them from the ritual. Instead, invite yourself and other participants to reflect on why those specific words might have been chosen, and what about them is making you uncomfortable. A moment of conversation about this discomfort might be a welcome way to ground yourselves in humility. Intention When you lead a ritual, how might you invite those who are participating to approach it with intention? As you use the rituals in this book, especially ones that might come from or honor a community or identity that is not your own, think about what context and grounding you may wish to offer. Is there something in the ritual’s description or setup that might be helpful to explicitly tell people? Should you share the context of any individual elements of the ritual, explaining the biography of a reading’s author or the history of a song? Is there language that should be defined or explained so that no one is confused during the ritual? What context would be helpful to provide in order to invite participants into the space? The more information you can share, the more everyone can enter the ritual with deep intentionality. The first time I led worship for Martin Luther King Jr. Day, I remarked to the staff team planning with me that I really wanted to sing “Lift Ev’ry Voice and Sing,” which is sometimes called the Black national anthem—but that I was also hesitant to use it. I had been in UU congregations where people seemed to sing this song as though it were any other, only half paying attention and not really noticing the words. I felt that it had often been sung in UU spaces without its history and power being recognized. And so the staff suggested that I share this reflection with the congregation as an introduction to the song, that I give them some historical and personal context, and then invite them to sing with intentionality and even discomfort. So I did. I introduced it by saying, This song deserves to be sung with attention. It is a song that starkly names the horrors and violence of racism in this country, and it is a song that should make us uncomfortable: uncomfortable with the history that it calls upon, uncomfortable with the fact that the struggle for racial justice continues, and has not come quite so far as it should have by now. How can anyone sing the words “treading our path through the blood of the slaughtered” without a deep, deep discomfort? By sharing this with the congregation, I enabled them to be more deeply connected with the song, its history, and my experiences. I believe that this allowed us to all have a more deeply spiritual and intentional moment in singing it. Accountability Accountability invites us to lead and participate in rituals through the context of relationship with those who created them or those for whom they were created. Do you, or does your congregation, have a relationship with someone whose identity the ritual is focused on? If so, consider inviting them into the planning process and offering to let them lead the ritual—but without assuming or expecting that they will want to take on that labor. If they express concerns about the ritual being led in your setting, take that as an opportunity for you to learn more, rather than just leading it anyway. If the ritual was written by or for people with a marginalized identity that you do not hold, do not adapt pieces of it to be about your identity instead. Consider whether you can offer participants information about the ritual, such as its historical context, to help them understand it better. In the setup for “For Release from Prison, Jail, or Detention,” Jason Lydon explains that “all quotes and readings in this ritual (aside from the biblical quote) come from currently or formerly incarcerated writers.” You may want to explicitly say that when introducing the ritual, so that those present can understand the context in which the readings were chosen. Follow Lydon’s request and “do not include additional writings from people who have not experienced incarceration,” even if you think they might be a perfect fit. In “For Coming Out Day,” Rose Maldonado Schwab says that she wrote the ritual to be led by a leader who is part of the LGBTQ+ community and that some language might need to be adapted if the leader is an ally, so that they don’t claim identities they don’t hold. Since she has directly invited it, this adaptation is okay; but this is not an invitation to change the identities listed in the “Invitation to the LGBTQ+ Community” section just because they might be unfamiliar to the person leading the ritual. Gratitude Engaging with these rituals from a place of gratitude means appreciating the people who wrote them and the communities and experiences from which they come. This can be as simple as making sure that you name the author of the ritual (and anyone else who may have written elements of it) for participants. If the ritual is one you’ve been wishing for, or one that perfectly fits a moment in your life or the life of your community, you might express your gratitude directly to its creators. Finally, sharing the rituals with others who might be in need of them is a powerful way to show your gratitude for the work of their creators. Conclusion Approaching and engaging with these rituals from a place of humility, intention, accountability, and gratitude can be difficult work. At times it might feel overwhelming or even impossible. The reality is, you will not do this work perfectly. You are going to make mistakes, or wish you had done things differently, and it will be frustrating at times. However, the goal is not perfection; instead, the goal is to continue to learn and grow, to connect in relationship to others, and to repair covenant and rebuild relationships when something isn’t right. The rituals in this book have been lovingly created and offered as a gift, and the best way that we can honor that gift is by receiving it with a spirit of humility, intention, accountability, and gratitude. May these rituals anchor your roots and feed your spirit. Rev. Aisha Ansano believes that deep relationship building is crucial in the struggle for justice in our world and is called to serve as a prophetic and pastoral presence to those seeking spiritual community and connection. She is a cofounding minister of Nourish, which helps Unitarian Universalists feel fed in body and spirit through embodied worship experiences. Aisha also serves as the denominational counselor to UU students at Harvard Divinity School. She lives in Malden, Massachusetts.