For Weaning Rev. Elizabeth Carrier-Ladd This ritual is to honor and mark the transition of a child weaning from nursing. It can be done either as part of an intentional weaning process or after a child has weaned on their own, and it can be done by the nursing parent and the child alone, or with family members, or others whose presence the nursing parent feels would be meaningful, as witnesses to the transition. Whether or not the child can understand that this change is significant, it can be powerful for both parent and child to mark it. There are two versions of this ritual: one to be used with a child who cannot understand or participate in it, and one to be used with a child who can. Materials □ Embroidery floss □ Child-friendly scissors □ Safety pin Setup Choose a location for the ritual that feels comfortable. Put the scissors and safety pin somewhere you can get them but the child cannot, such as in a pocket. Place the embroidery floss nearby. You may want to practice ahead of time to determine how large the bracelet or bracelets you will make should be. They should be tied around your wrist and, as appropriate, your child’s tightly enough that they will not fall off accidentally, but not so tightly that they can’t be taken off if you wish to. Script FOR A CHILD WHO CANNOT UNDERSTAND (Hold the child on your lap or in your arms.) I want us to mark a shift that has happened. Our relationship is evolving. You will always be my special little one. And our relationship changing is exciting and sad at the same time. You are no longer drinking milk from my body. (Name any feelings you have. It is normal and okay to have a lot of complex and even contradictory feelings around this transition.) I love being able to watch you become yourself each day. So I would like to do a little ritual with you in order to mark this change in our relationship. (Pick up the embroidery floss.) This string represents our relationship. It is so beautiful. So special. And you and I are wrapped closely together no matter what. I will always be your [use whatever name your child calls you]. I will always love you so, so much. (Wrap the floss around both of your bodies three times.) And our relationship is changing right now. As you grow up and you no longer need to eat from my body, we are able to take more space from each other sometimes. You need me in different ways. You may even need me less. And that is okay. It’s wonderful. Even as it may be hard sometimes for either or both of us. We can cut this cord to show how you are growing up. And how our physical relationship is changing. (Cut the floss, severing the binding around you. You may want to hold the child’s hand as you do so. If you like, take a moment to share with them some of your feelings about the moment of cutting; you might feel like cheering, or sighing, or talking through the complexity of your feelings.) And our relationship continues. It just changes. So I will make myself a bracelet out of this floss, so that I can hold close our special relationship even as it is changing right now, and you can touch it or hold it when we are snuggling, which we will still do a lot. We know that our relationship will keep changing as you keep growing. And as I keep growing. So this is just one step in our ever-evolving relationship. And no matter what, we will always be special to each other. And you will always be my little one. And I will always love you so completely. (Cut the floss into three equal pieces and tie them in a knot together at one end. Put the safety pin through the knot and attach it to something to anchor it so that you can braid the strands of floss. Choose any braiding pattern you like.) (When the braid is long enough, tie it off, cut away any trailing ends, and tie it on your wrist as a bracelet. You may say these words to yourself or hold your child again for this part.) This is to remind us of how special our relationship is, was, and always will be. I can wear this to remember as long as I want. And we know that we will not forget, even long after I stop wearing this particular keepsake. Because we do not need reminders to know how important we are to each other. (Offer your child a hug, a kiss, or whatever form of affection they like best.) FOR A CHILD WHO CAN UNDERSTAND Sit with me a minute. I want us to mark a shift that has happened. Our relationship is evolving as you grow up. You will always be my special little one. And our relationship changing is exciting and sad at the same time. You are no longer drinking milk from my body. Right? (Allow time for a response.) How do you feel about this change? (Allow time for a response and honor every feeling expressed.) (Name any feelings you have. It is normal and okay to have a lot of complex and even contradictory feelings around this transition.) I love being able to watch you become yourself each day. So I would like to do a little ritual with you in order to mark this change in our relationship. Okay? (Allow time for a response. Then offer your child some different colors of embroidery floss.) Which color should we use? (Put the unchosen colors aside.) Good choice! What a pretty color. So, this string represents our relationship. It is so beautiful. So special. And you and I are wrapped closely together no matter what, right? I will always be your [use whatever name your child calls you]. I will always love you so, so much. (Wrap the floss around both of your bodies three times.) And our relationship is changing right now. As you grow up and you no longer need to eat from my body, we are able to take more space from each other sometimes. You need me in different ways. You may even need me less. And that is okay. It’s wonderful. Even as it may be hard sometimes for either or both of us. (Hand the child the scissors.) You can cut this cord to show how you are growing up. And how our physical relationship is changing. (If necessary, help your child cut the floss to sever the binding around you. Take a moment for each of you to share feelings about the moment of cutting, if that feels appropriate: you or they might feel like cheering, or sighing, or talking through the complexity of your feelings.) And our relationship continues. It just changes. So I will make us both bracelets out of this floss, so that we can hold close our special relationship even as it is changing right now. We know that it will keep changing as you keep growing. And as I keep growing. So this is just one step in our ever-evolving relationship. And no matter what, we will always be special to each other. And you will always be my little one. And I will always love you so completely. (Cut the floss into six equal pieces. Bring the ends of three pieces together and tie a knot, put the safety pin through the knot, and attach it to something to anchor it so that you can braid the strands of floss. Choose any braiding pattern you like. When the braid is long enough, tie it off and cut away any long trailing ends. Do the same with the other three strands. Your child may be interested, or even want to participate, but it’s fine if they just want to play while you do this. When both braids are finished, tie one on your wrist and the other on your child’s as bracelets.) This is to remind us of how special our relationship is, was, and always will be. We can wear these to remember as long as we want. And we know that we will not forget, even long after we stop wearing these particular keepsakes. Because we do not need reminders to know how important we are to each other. (Offer your child a hug, a kiss, or whatever form of affection they like best.)