For Honoring Our Connection to Water Liz James and Kathryn Green This ritual can be used by a group of any size to acknowledge our spiritual and bodily connection to water and honor the central importance of water to life. It could be part of a congregational worship service on water, e.g., to celebrate World Water Day, an annual United Nations observance day held on March 22. It was created by the authors for such a service in their congregation, the Saskatoon Unitarians, in Saskatchewan, Canada. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Several bowls of water, one of them small enough to be carried to participants □ Tables, one for each of the larger water bowls □ Recorded water sounds or video Setup This ritual can be performed in any indoor space that is suitable for the size of the group, or outdoors. You can use a choir and soloist, a song leader and accompanist, or recorded music. Place the chalice on the altar table, and one of the larger bowls of water on each of the other tables. You will staff one water station; recruit helpers to staff the others, and another helper to carry the smaller bowl to any participants who prefer not to come forward. (If you have a small group, use only one large water bowl, placing it on the altar table with the chalice.) Script Chalice Lighting We do not fight for the water. Even when we act as water keepers, we are not brave warriors stepping between the gun and its target, saving something outside ourselves. We are the water. We are a tiny piece in its journey through this world, and when it breaks we break, and when it sings we sing. And when we fight for it, we are fighting for ourselves. When we protect it, we are protecting ourselves. And when we love it, when we are filled with an awe so wide that it feels like a soul gasp that reaches right to our toes, we are loving ourselves unfolding in our knowledge that this world is a miracle and we are miracles and that we and it deserve to be safe. (Light the chalice.) Reading (Adapted from Rev. Anne Barker) All water is holy water From the sky or from the sea or from the tap It is not holy because we bless it It is not holy because we gather with it in reverence It is holy because it is the stuff of life Its movement in our veins is part of a larger stream That comes from sources that stretch farther back than history And stretches into a future that reaches farther forward than imagination And its place in us Makes us a part of that great story Song “The River” (Coco Love Alcorn) (Lead participants in singing, have the choir sing, or play the recording.) Opening Words Most of our planet is covered with water, and most of our body is made up of water. The molecules of water that are in us have already been in and out of countless living things, perhaps in every form of life that has ever lived on earth. Through water we are bound together with everything else that lives, everything that has lived, and everything that will live. Water’s essential role in life has always been understood by human beings, and so it is not surprising that water is a virtually universal element in religious and spiritual traditions. It is used as a metaphor and in narratives and rituals: giving life, blessing, cleansing, and protecting. Indigenous worldviews recognize water as the lifeblood of Mother Earth, with the power to create life and to destroy it. Water is a living spiritual force that we exist in relationship with; it is not just a resource for us to use as we will. The water blessing that you are invited to take part in today reflects the inherently sacred nature of water. Water does not need our blessing; rather, we are blessed by water’s existence in our world, and in our very bodies. In a moment, you will hear several simple songs. You are welcome to sing along! After we sing for a bit, my helpers and I will go to the water stations. [Indicate the location of each station.] If you’d like to receive a water blessing, come to a water station, or raise a hand and we will come to you. We will touch your forehead with a drop of water. If you’d prefer to have your hands blessed, just hold them out like this [demonstrate]—whatever feels right. Then we’ll put a hand on your shoulder and speak the blessing. Step back when you are ready. If you don’t remember the instructions, don’t worry. You can hold back and watch others first. Music Three Water Chants (The choir or song leader sings each of these chants several times, with the congregation invited to join in as they feel comfortable. You may wish to provide lyrics. The singing should continue until everyone has had a chance to participate in the water blessing.) Water moving through the world Wetland, stream, and flood Water moving through me Breath and bone and blood Holy water, flowing free From the mountains to the sea From the rain clouds to the ground Holy water, all around In a dance of air and sky Rain we fall and waves we rise Anointing (After singing for a while, you and your helpers go to the water stations and, with a silent gesture, invite participants to come forward. Another helper watches for people who have raised their hands and brings the smaller bowl of water to them. Anoint each participant’s forehead or hands with a drop of water, and then place one hand on their shoulder while you say the blessing.) With this water, you are blessed. (Musicians should be invited to participate in the ritual too, timing their participation so that the singing can continue without interruption. After most people have come forward for the blessing, start playing a video or audio recording of moving water, and continue to play it as the singing fades out. Allow everyone to quietly take in the sounds, and perhaps images, of the water for a few moments.) Chalice Extinguishing You are blessed In your stillness And in your wildness, too In the rush of current that will carry you Through the muck and mud puddles of living You are part of a larger story You are blessed (Extinguish the chalice. As the chalice is extinguished, play or have a soloist sing the following excerpt from “The River.”) Water heal my body, Water heal my soul, When I go down down to the water By the water I feel whole. Three Water Chants Words by Kathryn L. Green & Liz James, music by Kathryn L. Green Sing each chant as many times as needed, flowing from one section to the next. To end, you may wish to repeat the last line (“Rain we fall and waves we rise”) twice.