For Carrying Hope after Collective Loss Heather Petit There are times when holding hope for ourselves can feel impossibly difficult, and yet we can still hold hope for someone else. This may be especially true when a community has undergone a trauma—such as significant layoffs, a tragedy or injustice tied to an identity shared by many community members, or something else—that affects some community members in ways they prefer to keep private. This ritual allows us to offer our hopes for others to hold without naming them, and to collectively carry the hopes of each individual. It is not appropriate for communities that are experiencing significant issues of misconduct or breach of covenant. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Small stones or other objects, at least one for each participant □ Bowl to hold the ritual objects □ Small fabric bags, baskets, or other containers for people who have difficulty holding small objects in their hands Setup The script is written assuming that you are using stones, but you can use any variety of small objects that all participants will be able to hold and touch: sea glass, crystals, large seeds, etc. Do not use objects that are all identical. Arrange seats in a circle, with the altar table in the center where it can be accessed by all attendees. Put the bowl of stones on the altar. If accessing the altar may be difficult for some participants, recruit a helper to deliver stones as needed, and give them a smaller bowl to carry stones in. Decide who will take the extra stones at the end of the ritual, to hold the hopes of those who contributed those stones. This might be you or another community leader or group. Script Chalice Lighting Blessed Universe, Spirit of Life and Love and Hope, May we know ourselves and each other as we are. We are beings with minds and hearts and spirits, with histories and relationships and senses. We all arrived here as ourselves, with every aspect of our being present, every identity, every bit of our humanity, with every concern and hope embodied. Here in this beloved community, we are not just each ourselves—together we recognize our shared identity as members of this [community, congregation]. [If offering this ritual in a religious context, add “and we know that we are part of the living tradition of our faith that extends far beyond these walls.”] Today we each come bearing burdens and cares that are only ours to bear, and yet together we can take up the weight of these things for each other. We can as a community transform burdens into hope. May it be so. Blessed be. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words Today we will be holding hope for each other and sharing that hope collectively. We will not be speaking any of these hopes aloud, and yet some things may be too tender to be offered to collective care, even silently. Today may not be the day to offer a particular hope, but another hope may do. Likewise, today may not be the day for one or another of us to pick up a hope to carry for someone else. We may not have the focus or energy to offer to the task. The ebb and flow of each of those acts, for each of us, is unique. Feel free to participate in any part of this ritual as you are moved, knowing that you are welcome and included however you participate, in whatever ways you choose to be present. Let us take a moment to enter this space. (Allow several moments of quiet for people to settle in.) Sharing Stones Here in this bowl, there are smooth stones. We will each place a hope into one of these stones, and then each of us will take away a different stone, bearing the hope of another of us. Since some people may choose not to return their stones to the bowl, and some people may choose not to take away someone else’s stone, any remaining stones will be taken by [Name] to be held—no hope will be left untended. I invite each of you to come up and pick a stone from the bowl. If you prefer, we will bring some to you for you to choose. Just raise your hand, and a helper will come to you. (Each person takes a stone.) Hold in your heart something that is troubling you, or that is difficult or worrisome or simply is too much to deal with right now. (Pause for several moments.) Now think of a hope that would lift that burden, something that would ease the weight, resolve the problem, tend the heartache, begin to bring you fully into yourself with joy and satisfaction and courage once again. If you have no words, no names, no way to formulate this in your mind or heart, then just feel the longing, the yearning to be more at ease in the ongoing work of being human, alive, and present to all that is our lives. (Pause for several moments.) I now invite you to place this newly formed hope or longing into the stone. Let it soak in, until it is held fully in the shape of the stone. (Indicate by gesture the stones left in the bowl.) While you place your hope into the stone you hold, I will place hope for myself, this community, and our larger communities in the world into the stones that remain in the bowl. [If you are holding this ritual in response to a particular event, adapt this line to speak specifically about it.] (Touch the stones, hold your open palms over them, or in some other way show that you are symbolically placing hope into them. Pause again for several moments to give everyone time to finish.) I now invite you all to return your stones to the bowl, as you choose. If you wish to keep yours to hold for yourself, that is entirely welcome. If you raise your hand, a helper will come collect your stone and bring it to the bowl, or you can come forward to return it yourself. (Wait until everyone who wishes to has returned their stones.) Our collective hopes are … here. (Gently stir the stones in the bowl.) I now invite us each to take a different stone back out, as we choose. You may not feel able to hold someone else’s hope today, even if you put yours into the bowl to be held. That is entirely okay. If you do want to take one, you can raise your hand and a helper will bring some stones to you for you to choose, or you can come forward now. (Each person who wishes to takes a stone.) If you are holding a stone, look at it now. Feel the shape and weight of it. This represents a hope either in someone else’s heart or in your own. Whether or not you are holding a stone yourself, look around at each of us, at all of us. Whether or not you are holding a stone, you are part of this community that has shared its burdens and hopes with one another. Take a moment to breathe gently. See, hear, feel our collective presence, all of us together, each of us with hopes we have for ourselves, each of us choosing where our hope is best held, each of us choosing to witness or to take up the hopes of others, all of us right where we should be. The hopes we held alone in our hearts just a few moments ago are now held in community, together. If you are holding a stone, I invite you to take it home with you. Place it somewhere you can see it throughout the next week, so that you can be reminded to hold up that unknown and unspoken hope for another or for yourself. If you have chosen not to take a stone today, know that your hope will be well tended, and allow yourself the comfort of knowing that all these hopes are well held. Individually, we all have difficulties. Together, we are all upheld. Song “From You I Receive” (Joseph Segal and Nathan Segal) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing When we are hurting In any of the ways we hurt Brokenhearted or worn down When that thing that bothers us Seems like too little to mention Or far too much to share Especially when everyone else has their troubles and cares And we don’t like to be a burden May we remember that hard things— Little difficulties and major challenges— When met with loving community Transform into hope And hope is not a burden at all. (Extinguish the chalice.)