For Lamenting and Setting Intentions to Heal White Supremacy Culture Rev. Carol Cissel This ritual is adapted from one written for the “Promise and the Practice of Our Faith” campaign, a set of worship and religious education materials published on the Unitarian Universalist Association’s WorshipWeb to encourage Unitarian Universalists to listen deeply to and center the stories of people of color in our movement. It strives to create an opportunity for individuals, congregations, and communities to lament what we have lost, petition for a way forward, confess our hopes and fears, and then set intentions that honor the past but lean strongly into the future. Materials □ Altar table □ Four smaller tables for stations □ Four tablecloths: black, white, light blue, and red □ Four large white candles □ Large clear glass bowl of water □ Small deep bowl for salt □ Stick to mix the salt and water □ Small cup □ Several pinwheels □ Small blank cards, such as index cards, at least two for each participant □ Pens or pencils □ Basket to collect cards □ Basket or bowl of small stones, at least one for each participant □ Two large clear glass bowls, one filled with white sand and the other with black sand □ Stick to stir the sands □ Tray and small bowls to make a traveling station □ Chime Setup The four stations of this ritual can be arranged in a number of ways: in a circle, along a wall, or in the corners of your space. Allow space for participants to move around them. The actions participants are asked to take are simple—dropping salt into a bowl of water, writing on a card, taking a stone from a beautiful basket, mixing black sand into white sand—but they are powerful. The four stations are most effective in this order: • Lament • Petition • Confession • Intention However, they can be approached in any order, according to your group’s size, the space available, and the physical arrangement of your space. If your group is big, having everyone go to the stations in the same order will disrupt the ritual’s flow and take a long time; encourage each person to move through them in the order that feels right. Do not fret: someone might need to begin by asking for help at the Petition station, and someone else might need to end by laying down their grief for what we have lost at the Lament station. Let them go where their heart needs to be. Make trays with the ritual elements—small bowls of water and salt and something to stir with, a pinwheel, index cards and pens, and small bowls of black and white sand plus something to stir them with and some small stones—to bring to those with limited mobility. Set up the altar table at the front or center of your space. Place the small cup on it, to be used at the close of the ritual. Place the station tables in the locations you have chosen for them, and set them up as follows: • Lament—Set the table with a black cloth, a large white candle in the center, a large clear glass bowl of water, a small deep bowl for salt, and a stick to mix salt gently into the water. • Petition—Set the table with a light blue cloth, a large white candle in the center, and several pinwheels. • Confession—Set the table with a white cloth, a large white candle in the center, an empty basket to collect cards, some pens or pencils, and two stacks of small blank cards. Label one stack HOPES and the other FEARS. • Intention—Set the table with a red cloth, a large white candle in the center, a basket or bowl of small stones, two large, clear glass bowls of white sand and black sand, and a stick to gently stir the black sand into the white. It’s okay if you don’t have the perfect bowl or the exact color of cloth. The important thing is to embrace the meaning and symbolism of the tables. Also place an instruction sheet on each station. The sheet should name the ritual component (Lament, Petition, Confession, or Intention), explain its purpose, and describe what participants are asked to do and say aloud at that station. Recruit five helpers (or more if you have a very large group). Post one at each station to offer assistance or gently repeat directions. The fifth will bring a tray holding the ritual elements of each station—small bowls of water and salt plus something to stir with, a pinwheel, index cards and pens, and small bowls of black and white sand plus something to stir with and some small stones—to anyone who requests it. These helpers need to be chosen mindfully and cared for (perhaps with a blessing ahead of time), because they’re being entrusted with powerful work on behalf of the community. Have them practice what they’re doing ahead of time. This ritual is intended to be done without conversation or chatter. The author recommends that it be accompanied by music from the African American tradition, whether offered by a full choir, performed by a soloist, or recorded. The point is to fill the air with the music of African Americans and create a container to hold the ritual. Music will also dissuade general conversation. The murmuring voices of those speaking their laments or stating their intentions aloud are welcome. If needed, the helpers will speak gently to assist those using the stations. Script Opening Words Dear ones, I invite you to enter a space of lament and intention. Over the years, our faith has not lived up to our deepest values. We have been harmed and caused harm through the white supremacy culture that is in the very air we breathe. Today we have an opportunity to lament what we have lost because of that, to petition for a way forward, to confess our hopes and fears, and then to set intentions that honor the past but lean strongly into the future. The tools we will use are simple. The results we hope for are not. We grieve what has been done. We honor, and we lament. This is what is past. The ways in which we preach to each other, how we confess our dreams and desires, and how we begin to forgive ourselves are the present. What we choose to do tomorrow, with intention, is our future. There are four tables here in this room. Each has a purpose. One table is for lament, allowing you to create tears of healing by mixing a dash of salt into a bowl of water while softly speaking aloud your sorrow for all that has been squandered and lost. Another table provides a space to petition the universe, to ask for help as we move forward together, by blowing air gently into a pinwheel. The third is a place to confess in writing your hopes and fears, for the power of the written word cannot be denied. The final table is a place to give voice to your intention. Say aloud something you will do to move our [faith, community, world, etc.] forward, and then pour a little black sand into the bowl of white sand. Draw the stick through the sands, blending black into white, watching the black sand create a path in the white sand, and then mark your intention by taking a stone with you. Carry that stone as a reminder of your promise to take action. Music will accompany you on this journey. As you are moved, and in any order, visit each table. Signal a helper if you’d like the stations to come to you. Let us begin. (Sound a chime, and then have the music start. Participants make their way forward and move through the stations, until everyone has visited each one.) Closing Words (Sound a chime, and have the music fade. The helpers empty the basket of cards from the tray into the main basket and the bowl of tears from the tray into the main bowl of tears, and then bring forward the bowl of tears, one pinwheel, the basket of cards, the main bowl of mixed sand and the one from the tray, and a stone, and place them on the altar table.) Together we have shed tears and lamented the past. (Dip the small cup into the bowl of tears and then pour the liquid back into the bowl. Do this three or four times.) We have petitioned the universe and asked for help. (Blow the pinwheel, wait for it to stop turning, and blow it again.) We have confessed our hopes and fears. (Two or three times, lift several cards and let them fall from your hand back into the basket.) And we have spoken aloud and promised our intentions by mixing black sand into white. (Lift a bowl of sand up to chest height, hold it out toward the participants, and then lower it back to the table.) Our work is not done. So much more is required of us. The journey ahead is steep and littered with crevasses and boulders. Painful blunders await. Know this: We will make mistakes as we move forward and seek to serve each other. We will hurt each other unintentionally with our words and deeds. We will shy away from the fiery truth needed to truly change. And when we do embrace the flames of change, they will scorch our hearts and singe our hands. It will not be easy. But today we make a start. We have set our intentions [hold up a stone] and promised to move forward, together. Blessed be, and amen.