For the Dedication of a Memorial Bench or Tree Rev. Elizabeth A. Harding Dedicated to my hospice patients and their families This ritual is intended to help an individual or family who have experienced the death of a loved one to memorialize them by planting a tree and/or installing a memorial bench. It could be combined with a scattering of ashes near the bench or tree. The author created it while working as a hospice chaplain and bereavement counselor. Materials □ Small altar table □ Chalice □ Photo of the deceased For dedicating a memorial bench: □ Small bowl of diluted lavender oil □ Handkerchiefs or tissues □ Feathers or wands For planting or dedicating a tree: □ Small cups of water, one for each participant □ String or ribbon, if the tree is already planted □ Soil, if the tree will be planted during the ritual Setup Put the altar table close by the bench or tree, and arrange the photo and ritual items on it. Some people are very sensitive to essential oils, and others may simply not wish to get oil on their hands. When you hold the ritual, invite participants to dip a wand or feather rather than their finger if they prefer. You can also substitute an unscented oil, cut flowers, or something else that is safe for all. If you are planting or dedicating a tree, mark off its space with ribbon or string, especially if it is already planted and needs to be distinguished from others around it. If you will be planting the tree during the ritual, dig the hole ahead of time and designate participants to do the physical labor of planting it. Make sure you have any other tools you may need, such as a knife to cut twine or burlap. If any participants have limited mobility, make sure they have easy access to the tree or bench. If it will be impossible for them to access it, ask them ahead of time how they would prefer to participate. You may want to have a small tray of the ritual items to bring to participants with limited mobility. Script Opening Words Our opening words come from Marge Piercy. Connections are made slowly, sometimes they grow underground. You cannot always tell by looking what is happening. More than half a tree is spread out in the soil under your feet. Penetrate quietly as the earthworm that blows no trumpet. Fight persistently as the creeper that brings down the tree. Spread like the squash plant that overruns the garden. Gnaw in the dark and use the sun to make sugar. Weave real connections, create real nodes, build real houses. Live a life you can endure: make life that is loving. Keep tangling and interweaving and taking more in, a thicket and bramble wilderness to the outside but to us interconnected with rabbit runs and burrows and lairs. This is how we are going to live for a long time: not always, For every gardener knows that after the digging, after the planting, after the long season of tending and growth, the harvest comes. Chalice Lighting We light this chalice today to celebrate the life and grieve the death of [Name]. Each of us, at the end of our lives, returns to the center, at rest, body and spirit returned to the Great Love, the Great Love that surrounds us and is a part of every human journey. Throughout our lives we experience sorrow and struggle, joy and celebration, accomplishment and failure. Each moment, holy and sacred, making up the whole that is the light we shine in the world. While today we note the loss of [Name] and know that their individual light has gone out and returned to the Sacred, we know that the love we share today, in our stories and memories and ritual, is all part of that Great Love, that sacred energy that is part of life and part of death. As we light this chalice, may we be held in the light we share with [Name] and the light that we will take with us throughout our lives. Our lights, when combined, create such brilliance. (Light the chalice.) We come together today to dedicate this [bench and/or tree] to [Name]. A place of rest. A place where people can gather and remember them. Sharing In order to bring [Name]’s spirit into this time and this space, I invite you to say a word or a phrase [or “share a memory or story”] that sums up [Name] for you, that brings their energy, their light, here. (Participants share.) Option 1: Bench Dedication At this time, we will dedicate this bench. Our lives are often busy. To have a place of rest when we are moving back and forth taking care of loved ones is a gift. This bench will become a place for those of us gathered here to rest our spirits and remember [Name]. There will be tough days, when it is difficult to think about anything but our loss; and there will be days of joy, when [Name]’s energy will permeate each moment, and we will feel as if they are with us. And they are, always, tied to us and tied, now, to this bench as we make it our sacred space. The history of anointing can be traced back to the ancient Greeks. The word consecration means making sacred. To consecrate this bench means to make it a sacred space where we can go to remember [Name] and feel connected to them and to the Great Love that holds us throughout our lives, through joys and sorrows, struggles and celebrations. The Greeks used oils partly to cleanse, partly to perfume, partly to set apart that which was important to them. Today, we do all those things for [Name]’s bench. We use lavender oil because it helps people find a sense of calm and rest. I invite you, family and friends of [Name], to line up and each take a fingertip or a feather and dip it into this little bowl of lavender oil. Then spread it or touch it to the bench. (Participants dip their fingertips or feathers and put the oil on the bench, then wipe their fingers with handkerchiefs or tissues and return to their places. When all who wish to have done so, wipe any excess oil off the bench so that animals will not lick it up and be harmed.) Option 2: Tree Dedication Reading “Becoming, Always” (Elizabeth Harding) First. A seed burrows deep underground. Water comes. Sun shines. Air moves here and there and everywhere. The seed grows. Roots begin twining their paths, finding connections among their fellow trees-to-be. The trunk emerges. The tree begins to seek water, air and sunlight, connection among the other trees, and the earth. Reaching out. Standing strong. Growing. Reminding us of all the ways we are connected to each other. Growth allows us to deepen and expand those connections as leaves sprout, flowers grow, and fruit may flourish. Let us plant this tree so that we may join together. Remembering our loved ones. Moving onward while holding all that went before us close. Becoming. Always. At this time, we [plant, dedicate] the tree, this place of memory for [Name] and their family and friends. (If the tree is being planted, the designated participants place it in the hole and add soil.) I invite you to take a cup of water. As you feel moved, please water the tree with your cup of water. Like sharing memories, watering this tree will help us keep [Name]’s spirit with us. (Participants water the tree.) Song Having dedicated this beautiful place of memory for [Name], let us sing together “For the Beauty of the Earth.” (Lead participants in singing.) Closing Words May we be grateful for all that is given and grateful for all that is shared, especially in sharing the life of [Name]. Let us remember that the stories, phrases, words, and song shared today are sparks of light. They are part of the light we kindled today as we began our service together. They will continue to shine within us as we remember [Name] and their life with us. May [Name] live on in each of us. [“May the bench be a place to gather our thoughts, and to find rest in this busy world” and/or “May the tree shade us as it grows.”] May we keep [Name] present in our memories to keep the gift of their presence always with us. Chalice Extinguishing May we take the opportunities that come to create those connections, share those stories, and light those lights within us even as we extinguish this chalice. May that light join our lights and keep that sacred flame burning, day after day, month after month, year after year, helping us to know that we are deeply connected to each other, both in life and in death. Blessed be and amen. (Extinguish the chalice.)