For Losing a Wanted Pregnancy Rev. Caitlin Cotter Coillberg This ritual is intended for individuals or families who have suffered (or are suffering) a miscarriage, or have discovered that their wanted pregnancy (fetus) is nonviable and are undergoing treatment (such as a D&C procedure) to end the pregnancy. Materials □ Chalice Setup This ritual is intended to be used after a miscarriage, while the focus person is miscarrying, or on the day of the procedure that will end the pregnancy and is designed to be led by a support person (such as a minister, chaplain, or trusted friend). It can also be done shortly after a miscarriage or procedure. Most hospitals have chaplains on call who can help you with this if you ask. This ritual was written for the end of a pregnancy involving a single fetus. Adapt the language if the situation involves multiples. If the focus person is heading to the hospital for a procedure, you may wish to lead this ritual in a living room or similar space before you go, to include as many loved ones as desired. Script Chalice Lighting We light this chalice for the fierce spark of devotion the unquenchable ember of tender hope the deep bright fire of compassionate connection. (Light the chalice.) Together we journey through the blazing pain of this day, sure in the knowledge that we are held in the unending warmth of love. Prayer (This is a good moment to invite all present to hold hands, and perhaps to close their eyes.) Spirit of Life and Love, be with us today in our pain and sorrow as we grieve the end of this pregnancy, as we honor this life that will not be lived, as we release the dreams that are now ended. We grieve the longed-for spark that was so joyfully carried, the possibility of a life that never got to breathe, never got to shine out into this beautiful hurting world. We grieve the child this fetus might have been, all the moments that might have happened, the possibilities that live on in our hearts. We honor the beauty of [Name]’s pregnancy and the anguish of this moment of ending, the tenderness of these hurting hearts. We affirm that this is not a moment of finding fault or shame, but of care and grief and release, of presence with these hurting hearts. [If the focus person is about to undergo a procedure] May the hands of the doctors and nurses be steady. May [Name]’s recovery be swift, even as we know that grief may be long. [Names of family members], may you be met with compassion and understanding, today and in the days to come. Saying Goodbye (If you are doing this ritual during an active miscarriage or before a procedure, you may wish to place your hands on the stomach of the pregnant person, if they consent to this. You could instead invite them to place their hands on their own stomach, and—again, only if they consent—invite participants to touch their shoulders. If you doing this ritual after a miscarriage or procedure, you may wish to invite participants to place their hands on their hearts.) Together in grief, we now say farewell. Tiny one, sweet small beginning, we had so hoped to meet you, so longed for you to grow and thrive. We are so sad that we will never get the chance to say hello—never get to hold the child you might have become. Goodbye, sweet small beginning, tiny one. Does anyone else have words of farewell, or anything you would like to say? (Take a moment of quiet here, allowing for whatever may or may not be spoken.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish this chalice, but not the love that holds these tender grieving hearts. Today is not the end of dreaming, nor of grieving, and we hold each other gently in the ache of this day, in this moment of ending. (Extinguish the chalice.) [Focus person and names of family members], blessings on your grieving, and your loving. May you know in every moment that you are loved, and you are not alone—not alone in loving, in grieving, in traveling through this pain. You are so, so loved.