Practical Tips for Rituals In this book you will find a variety of rituals for different settings and circumstances. These rituals are for you to use, adapt, and turn to as resources. To help you use them, we offer these practical tips: to make the space serve the ritual, to ground leaders of rituals in their role as facilitators, and to make the experience of the ritual as inclusive as possible. This is not an exhaustive guide, but rather an invitation to think through some practical and relational elements as you prepare to use the rituals in this book (and, perhaps, to create your own). Space and Setup Rituals happen in all kinds of different spaces. Sometimes a ritual happens spontaneously, with no time to prepare the space. That is okay. Your own energy as leader may be all you need to create the kind of environment in which powerful transformation can occur. When you are able to take the time to set up a space, remember that the environment of a ritual sets the tone before any words are spoken. As you are creating the space for the ritual, think about the kind of atmosphere you want people to enter into. What is the emotional goal of the ritual? Is it celebratory, somber, reflective, empowering? How can the space reflect that through its lighting, imagery, altar decorations, and sound as people enter the space? Consider also the flow of the space. In addition to being beautiful, is it practical? Is there room for people to move around if they need to? Or are there places that risk traffic jams and collisions? For example, if people need to move to the front of the space and then back to their seats, is there enough space to do that? Is there enough space for people using assistive devices like wheelchairs or scooters? What instructions will you need to offer? Gather all of your materials in advance, and think about where and how they will need to be used during the ritual. Do you have a place to lay your script down if you will need both hands? If you are passing around stones, do you have a container to hold them? Do you have a way to play recorded music or a way to project any slides or videos? Many of the rituals included in this book involve lighting candles or a chalice. The flaming chalice is a symbol of Unitarian Universalism and lighting and extinguishing a chalice is often used to mark the beginning and end of sacred time. If a ritual includes flame, there are several specific considerations you may wish to think about ahead of time. If the ritual is taking place outside where it may be windy, or if some participants may not be able to inhale smoke or safely handle flame, you may want to use battery-operated artificial candles instead. Similarly, if you will need to extinguish candles, consider providing a snuffer or another way to extinguish the flame in case anyone would have trouble blowing one out. Look through the script of the ritual and consider what words and music participants might need in front of them to participate fully. Print copies or create slides for any words or music that cannot be easily repeated after a leader or taught in the moment, and plan how and when you will distribute any handouts without disrupting the ritual. Taking the time to think through the space and setup can ensure that the space works in service of the ritual rather than against it and that logistical challenges will not impede its beauty and transformative power. Accessibility The embodied, participatory nature of rituals makes it particularly important to be mindful of accessibility. In making rituals accessible, we are embodying our values and theology: Unitarian Universalists, along with many others, believe that all people are whole and holy, that all bodies are good bodies, and that we are called to place justice and love at the center of our faith. It is important to consider how participants with a wide variety of mobility, sensory, allergy, and processing needs will experience all parts of the ritual: how they will enter into its space, how they will eat any food or drink involved, how they will perceive what is happening, how they will join in any shared words or movements. A ritual offered to the public will probably need to allow for a wider set of needs than one planned for a few people, but don’t assume you know all the needs even of close friends. It is always better to err on the side of greater accessibility. We have woven adaptations into the rituals in this book to make them more accessible to and inclusive of a wide variety of participants. If you know certain participants have disabilities or chronic illnesses, are neurodivergent, or have allergies, remember that they are the experts on their needs. When possible, ask them what would make the ritual most accessible to them. And of course, you are the expert on your own needs! Adapt the instructions in these rituals as you need to; for instance, you might place items on a higher or lower surface than is suggested, invite participants to come to you instead of moving toward them, or recruit a helper to lift or handle things for you. Many excellent resources for making worship spaces accessible are available from the Unitarian Universalist Association and the UU organization EqUUal Access. We know that our understanding of how to be inclusive keeps growing and changing, and we trust that this list will be incomplete. Here we offer some general thoughts about making rituals accessible. • If there will be more than ten people present, if people will be moving around, if they will be more than about ten feet apart, or if they will be outside, use a sound system and microphone at all times. Assisted listening devices are also a good idea. Sign language interpretation may be desirable. • Make sure any texts that participants will need are either printed or projected in an easily readable font and size. Have some large-print paper versions or a link to a downloadable document available for low vision participants. Microsoft Word documents are usually compatible with screen readers; PDFs are not. Consider describing aloud what is happening in the ritual, as well as the appearance of significant people and items. • Avoid using scented candles or other materials, especially when you are designing a ritual for a large group. Remember that even natural scents that many people enjoy, such as pine, eucalyptus, sage, and rose, can trigger allergies, so it is important to keep natural decorations away from people, and not to burn them or otherwise release their scent into the environment. If scents are a specific and necessary part of the ritual, check in with participants ahead of time to make sure there are no allergies or sensitivities. • If you are using food in the ritual, be sure there are options for people with food sensitivities or allergies, or who are in recovery. For instance, if serving bread and wine, include gluten-free bread and both sulfite-free and nonalcoholic wine. Avoid using foods that might produce airborne allergens. • In guided meditations and breathing exercises, remember that some people struggle to breathe easily. Instead of or in addition to suggesting deep breaths, try inviting people to breathe intentionally, or to pay attention to the rhythm of their breath without trying to change it. • Whenever you invite participants to stand, explicitly offer the option to sit as well. Also consider inviting people to stand or move around the space during the ritual as they feel necessary. If the ritual takes place inside a bounded space, clearly lay out the area included and explain how people should exit and reenter it if necessary. • When movement is part of the ritual, make sure that people who cannot do that movement have an equally meaningful option. For instance, people could be invited either to stand or to raise their hands; to come forward to light a candle or to have one brought to them; to bring items to a gathering spot or to have someone else bring them. You could also alter the movements according to the needs of your group, such as by having a focus person go to participants instead of asking all participants to come forward to them. • Be mindful of the height of tables, signs and posters, and other surfaces that people need to engage with. Avoid making the floor or ground the main ritual surface. Placing materials at multiple heights (floor, low table, higher table) makes them accessible to a wider variety of participants. • If you are in relationship with minority language communities, including the Deaf community, or expect minority language users to be present, arrange in advance for interpretation. Make sure that invitations and other publicity include the fact that the ritual will be interpreted, and if it is a public event, publicize it in the relevant language communities. • Remember that people process information in different ways and at different speeds, and offer multiple options for doing so: time to think before offering responses, the option to speak later (or not at all) rather than at an assigned moment, paper to jot down notes before sharing, etc. It is important that you be mindful of the particular group for whom you are leading a ritual. If done well, accessibility adaptations can make a ritual deeper and more meaningful for all participants. Music Music is an important way to enhance the tone, flow, and mood of the ritual. Many rituals in this book suggest songs, as well as places where musical underscoring might add to the experience. The majority of the songs suggested in the rituals can be found online or in the Unitarian Universalist hymnals Singing the Living Tradition and Singing the Journey. The authors have been thoughtful about choosing music that fits well with the theme and tone of each ritual, but you are welcome to choose your own music instead. Here are some tips for choosing and arranging for music: • Consider the overall mood and tone of the ritual. At this point in the ritual, are people going to be feeling upbeat, reflective, or somber? Choose music that will match that emotional space. • Will this be a song that everyone sings together or music that is performed by one or a few people (or recorded)? If it is a song that will be sung by everyone gathered, consider how familiar the group might be with the song. If it is a song that is new to many people, make sure it is easily taught and that you have a song leader arranged in advance to teach the song. Consider if people will need printed or projected lyrics for a song. • Many rituals have times where participants are silently participating in movement or reflection. This is an excellent opportunity to use musical underscoring (quiet background music, often instrumental) to enhance the moment. It smooths over any awkwardness and can help participants sink more deeply into the emotional experience of the moment. • Arrange the music in advance, either recorded or live. Make sure you have the equipment necessary for everyone to hear the music. • If the musician/song leader is a different person than the ritual leader, make sure you communicate in advance about cues and how to know when the music should begin and end. We strongly encourage the use of music in rituals. Music allows us to access emotion and touch our souls in ways that words sometimes can’t. When done well, music can help participants integrate the overall experience of a ritual in ways that are powerful and transformative. Adaptations for Online Rituals All the rituals in this book are designed to take place in person. However, as the Covid-19 pandemic taught us, it is important to be able to adapt rituals for virtual use. The authors of all of the rituals in this book have given permissions for their rituals to be used both in person and online. Adapting a ritual for use online is always easier if you are doing the ritual live and on a platform on which people can interact with one another. This allows for participation and for organic co-creation of the ritual experience. If you are adapting a ritual to be used in a multiplatform context, where some people are online and some are in person, make sure to give the people online a meaningful alternative to each in-person element of the ritual. This may mean that the two groups are doing slightly different rituals. As long as the meaning-making remains the same, that is okay. Ideally there will be a way for the two groups to connect, such as by reading aloud contributions that online participants have shared in the chat or by making online and in-person participants visible to one another. When some or all participants will be online, go through each element of your ritual and consider how it might work in an online format. There are a number of ways you can adapt participatory elements of rituals for use online. They include: • Using a chat function in place of spoken sharing. • Inviting people to engage in the same physical movements in their own spaces, such as reaching out hands to connect across screens. • Substituting items that people commonly have in their homes for traditional ritual items, so that each person can participate in the ritual action at home. You may need to tell online participants what to provide themselves with in advance. • Providing relevant materials in advance to people who will be participating online for them to use during the ritual. • Collecting photos from participants in advance to share during the ritual. In general, make sure that online participants have things to do just as in-person participants do; they should not be simply watching others act. Remember that online platforms also offer tools and options that are impossible in person, such as close-ups of what is happening and word clouds created on the spot by participants. While the experience of attending a ritual in person cannot be exactly replicated online, we have discovered that online rituals provide unique opportunities for creativity, connection, and transformation. Ritual Roles Rituals are, by their nature, participatory, and so it is the entire gathered body—whether one person or a hundred—that co-creates the ritual together. However, people may take on a variety of roles in that co-creation. In this book, we distinguish between four different roles: participant, helper, leader, and focus person. A participant is anyone who is attending and taking part in the ritual. This is the broadest category. Rituals are meant to include everyone in the room, and so, while people may take part in the ritual in different ways, there is no role for people who are simply observers. A helper is someone who assists in the ritual in some way. In several of our rituals helpers pass out supplies, direct the flow of traffic, or manage other details. A leader is a person who creates and holds the container in which the ritual experience can occur and guides the participants through it. In the Unitarian Universalist tradition anyone, minister or layperson, can lead a ritual, but most rituals do require a designated leader or leaders. A focus person, if there is one, is a person for whom the ritual is being performed. Such a ritual marks a personal life passage or moment, enabling a group or community to witness and mark it. In this book, we have rituals that are designed to be done by individuals for themselves; rituals designed for families or small groups, where one of the participants may also serve as a leader; and rituals designed for groups of any size in which the leader is distinct from the participants. Notes about Ritual Leadership A good ritual leader is someone who can remain mindful both of the plan and flow of the ritual and of the needs of the group that may arise during it. So much of the experience of a ritual is influenced by the tone and presence that its leader brings. A good ritual leader projects a sense of calmness and confidence, even when things don’t go according to plan (which will happen!). They read the mood of the room, model appropriate sharing, allow time for participants to reflect and share as well, and are comfortable with silence. If you are planning to lead a ritual, it is important to think through every step in advance. It can be helpful to do this in the space in which you will be leading the ritual. Think about who will be where, where materials will be set up, when participants will move and where they will go, how you will phrase explanations and directions, and any other concerns specific to your space and the participants. Sometimes a ritual leader is also a participant, or even a focus person. This is most often the case in rituals that are done in the home or by a family, when it may not make sense for an outside leader to be present. On the other hand, if you are a participant or focus person, you may want to have another person hold the space for you so that you may simply concentrate on the experience of the ritual, without needing to also attend to the needs of the group. Children in Rituals Rituals are one of the best tools for multigenerational worship and community building that we have. Rituals are often accessible to kids in ways that word-centered practices may not be, because they are embodied and participatory. In order to participate fully in a ritual, however, children may need some additional preparation or explanation from caregivers or other adults. Adults may need to repeat or interpret directions, explain actions, or demonstrate or model how to participate. As you are preparing for a ritual in which children will be participating, make sure that the materials are child-friendly, or that child-friendly alternatives are available (for example, offering battery-operated candles or washable markers). Keep an open mind about what children are capable of doing and understanding. You may be surprised by how much of the meaning and metaphor they take in. Children love rituals and the predictability and participation they offer. If you are looking for a way to create meaningful and memorable multigenerational worship services or other events, ritual is a great place to start. Consent and Comfort in Rituals People come to ritual spaces, especially religious ones, with a wide variety of experiences in spiritual communities. For some, those experiences have been profoundly healing and beautiful, while for others they have been painful and exclusionary. Some people are simply unfamiliar with being in a ritual space and may be uncomfortable or nervous that they won’t know the right way to move, speak, act, or otherwise participate. Whatever associations and past experiences people bring, there are many ways to make a ritual space more comfortable for all in attendance, and to attend to both spiritual and bodily consent throughout the ritual. It can be extremely helpful to give participants a sense of what will happen in the ritual ahead of time, to allay any nervousness. A leader might say, “Today we are going to share in a ritual of [ theme ], and in a few moments, I will invite you to [ action ].” Always make clear that participants can choose not to engage in any part of the ritual, without needing to justify or explain themselves. They can simply not do the suggested action, say “Pass” or shake their head when invited to speak, or otherwise indicate that they plan not to engage in that part of the ritual. If an element of the ritual involves touching other people (such as a laying on of hands or an anointing) give people the explicit option to participate in a meaningful way that does not involve touching or being touched. For some people touch is healing and connecting, but others may find it takes them out of the ritual headspace or feels threatening. Always give clear directions for how people should indicate if they do not wish to be touched (crossing their arms, for instance) and remind participants to respect one other’s bodily autonomy. One way to help people feel safe and comfortable is to use the right language for them. Especially when working with focus people, it is important to make sure that both the pronouns and the ways you describe their identities are the words they would use for themselves. The ritual scripts here default to the gender neutral pronoun they for a focus person, but be sure you know which pronouns you should use for the specific person or people you are working with—or if you shouldn’t use a pronoun for them at all.