For Trauma in the News Rev. Heather Concannon and Rev. Allison Palm This ritual is intended to be used on the Sunday following a major national trauma, devastating news event, or act of violence, with special care for events that affect or threaten the rights of marginalized identity groups. For instance, it could be used in response to mass shootings, verdicts in court cases centering on hate crimes or racialized shootings, Supreme Court decisions, or election results. It is intended to be used as a part of congregational worship and is crafted to be placed immediately before or after a congregational prayer or time for joys and sorrows. Materials □ Altar table □ Floating candle □ Stones in a small basket or bowl □ Clear bowl of water Setup Review the script to decide how many stones you will need and what you will say for each one; adapt the script as necessary to fit your circumstances. Put the basket of stones and the bowl of water on the altar table. Place the floating candle in the bowl of water. Try to use a candle that’s large enough to be visible to all participants. Script Introduction This morning we gather with heavy hearts After the news this week of [insert specifics]. We are shaken once again By the realities of oppression, violence, and suffering in our world. We cannot offer easy answers to these hard truths. But we do know that when we hold these truths together, they are lighter And that, together, it is easier to move forward with resilience and hope. Please join me in singing. Song “There Is a Love” (words by Rebecca Parker, music by Elizabeth Norton) (Lead participants in singing the third verse once through.) Water This water symbolizes our interdependence, our community, and the Spirit of Love that surrounds us all. Stones Option 1: Concepts These stones [lift up the basket of stones] represent the heaviness that we feel in holding this news. We place the stones in this water Because we know that they are lighter when we hold them together. (One by one, name specific concepts related to the event. These might be feelings, such as rage, sorrow, frustration; or biases, such as misogyny or racism; or the names of groups or communities affected. You can simply list them, or phrase them in statements like “Today we bring [feelings] for the ways this attack reminds us of [concept].” Place a stone in the water for each thing that you name or sentence that you say.) Option 2: Names These stones [lift up the basket of stones] represent those who were killed in [name the event]. As we place these stones in this water And read the name of each person who was killed We surround their families and loved ones with the love and care of this community. (Read the names ones by one, placing a stone in the water for each.) Song “There Is a Love” (Lead participants in singing the third verse once through.) Candle We hold on to our faith that in the end, love has the final say. We light this candle In hope that [name specific hopes and visions], With a commitment to [name specific actions or commitments], And with faith in the love that holds us and will not let us go. Let us sing again. Song “There Is a Love” (Lead participants in singing the third verse once through.)