For Earth Day Rev. theresa rohlck This is a ritual for honoring the fragility and resilience of this Earth, the beauty of the natural world, the impermanence of life, and the interconnectedness of all beings. The ritual invites participants to create an Earth circle from a variety of objects found in nature, while contemplating beauty and interconnectedness; the circle is dismantled at the end. This is a particularly accessible ritual for young people. Even the very young can participate when guided by a caregiver or teacher. This ritual was inspired by the abundance of chestnuts and pine cones, stones and shells, seeds and leaves the author collects on walks and was originally created as a virtual ritual during the Covid-19 pandemic. Materials □ Chalice □ Stones, feathers, pine cones, chestnuts, leaves, twigs, shells, and similar natural items, enough for each participant to create a design a foot across □ Tables for participants to work on □ Sheets of paper or placemats, square or round, at least a foot across Setup Set up tables and chairs, and lay a place mat for each participant. (If some people want to work in pairs, that’s fine.) Spread out the nature items on the tables so that a variety of them are accessible to all participants. Adapt the language given here to your participants: adults, intergenerational, youth only, etc. In particular, when working with younger participants, you may want to make clear at the beginning that the Earth circles let us practice letting go of things, because they will be wiped away at the end of the ritual. Script Introduction Today we are going to create, together, an Earth circle. What comes to mind when you think about a circle? (You can encourage participants to answer out loud, or to just think about their answers. If they are answering out loud, acknowledge the responses before moving on.) We honor the interdependent web of existence, and we celebrate that we are part of it. When I visualize that web I see concentric circles, starting from a small center point, but growing wider and wider. We are called to widen the circle that connects us all, to truly include everyone. Instead of just inviting someone into the small center of our existing circle, we can think about expanding, widening our circle to include more and more. As we see just how interconnected everyone on the planet is, we realize that our actions have an impact far beyond ourselves or our immediate community. The Earth itself is a three-dimensional circle, a sphere. As we make our Earth circles today, we will also center our thoughts on our relationship with the plants, animals, land, water, air, and all beings on this Earth. Will you join me on this spiritual journey now? Chalice Lighting We light a chalice to mark our beginning, and by doing so recognize that we are in sacred space together. (Light the chalice.) May this light represent the creative energy we each have burning within us that helps us imagine a world that is healthier, safer, and more just for all who inhabit the Earth, now and in the future. Creating Earth Circles Let’s begin creating our Earth circles. Each of us has a space to work in, marked out by the placemat. I am placing a smooth stone in the center of my space. Will you do that with me? Take a handful of breaths with me, breathing as it feels comfortable for you. You might want to close your eyes for a moment to help center yourself. (Pause and take a few breaths.) Now let’s begin to create a circular design, moving out from the center. You may use any of the materials you have near you, in any way you wish. There is no right or wrong way to do this meditation. (Begin creating your own Earth circle. You are modeling the steps for participants; doing it yourself also helps you pace your speaking. The creation should not be rushed.) As you place each item, take a moment to notice the beauty of the object you are holding. Feel how the stone fits into your palm, feel how smooth an old chestnut is, notice how symmetrical the seashell is. Place each one with intention and gratitude for all that the Earth provides for us. As you do this, reflect on who or what is within your circle right now. Who or what is excluded? What actions can you take to make the circle wider still? (Pause for a few moments.) Let’s continue now in silence. (Continue for as long as the meditation needs; do not rush.) As you are finishing your Earth circle, take a few more intentional breaths. (Pause and take a few breaths.) Do you feel more centered, more connected to the Earth, to each other, to nature? If you would, join me in singing “Circle ’Round for Freedom.” Use this time to finish your Earth circle if you are not quite finished. Song “Circle ’Round for Freedom” (Linda Hirschhorn) (Lead participants in singing.) Practicing Impermanence As human beings with agency to act, we are called to care for this planet, the Earth, our home. The Earth has existed for over 4 billion years, and the amount of time humans have existed is miniscule in comparison. Yet within only the past few hundred years, the actions of many human beings, countries, and governments have jeopardized the future of this planet, the future for our children and our children’s children. We are part of the natural cycles of life in which things are born, grow, and die, and new life begins again. You may have grown up never thinking that the Earth would die—it will, but the time frame is just too big to comprehend. What we do need to comprehend is that we are responsible for the ongoing devastation of this planet; the climate crisis is a very real reminder of this. Now, I invite you to slowly sweep away the design you created. Gently push all the items off to the side. (Demonstrate doing this. You may also invite participants to push items into a container, if that makes sense for your setup.) May this action remind us how fragile and impermanent life is, this world is. When there has been damage or loss to the environment, the Earth typically has been able to heal; as humans we can take action to help the healing, or we can choose to do nothing. We have the power to make a difference, no matter how small. What does the world look like, as you imagine it, when it is both whole and holy? Hold this image for a moment in your imagination. (Pause for several moments.) Extinguishing the Chalice Dear ones, May we not be discouraged when things end may we see that ending creates the potential for healing, for growth, and for renewal may we believe in our creative vision for what this Earth can be in the not too distant future and act to make it so. It is not too late. Amen. May it be so. (Extinguish the chalice.)