For Blessing a Space Where a Loved One Has Died Rev. McKinley L. Sims This is a ritual of restoring the space in which someone has died and honoring participants’ love of them. It is designed to be used at whatever stage of grief feels appropriate to the participants. If you are working with a group of more than four or five, provide several flowers or pieces of cloth so that several people can bless the space at a time. Materials □ Chalice □ Cut flower or piece of soft cloth □ Perfume, incense, or essential oil □ Small bowl of water □ Optional: Music If you are using essential oils or anything else with a scent, be sure no one with scent sensitivities will be present. You could use unscented candles instead of the perfume, incense, or essential oil. You will want enough candles to place throughout the space; you can set them out in advance, or place them as you light them. Setup You may need to adapt the ritual ahead of time, especially for circumstances where the death was unexpected or traumatic, such as by accident or suicide. Do this in consultation with the participants and with sensitivity to the complex feelings they may have around their loss. Script Chalice Lighting In Holy Mystery we are born. In Holy Mystery we live. In Holy Mystery we die. For those who are no longer here, and for those who remain, We light this holy flame. (Light the chalice.) Please join in singing “Meditation on Breathing.” Song “Meditation on Breathing” (Sarah Dan Jones) (Lead participants in singing.) Naming (Take perfume, incense, or oil and disperse it around the space, moving slowly and carefully. Let the air fill with a light smell. If you are using candles instead, light them. As you do this, repeat the following as many times as feels right.) [Name], We remember you. We honor you. We love you. [If participants agree that it is appropriate, add “Even when you were hard to love.”] We let you go into the Mystery. (When the room is filled with scent or candlelight, continue.) Cleansing (Dip the flower or cloth into the water.) From the waters of the womb you came, through the stormy waters of life you lived, and across the waters of death you sailed. We bless your memory in this space and lovingly release you from its bounds. I invite you to take the [flower, cloth] and, one by one, cleanse this space. Touch and bless each part of it, each item of furniture, that holds a memory, a grief, or a tender joy. Take the time you need, and as we do this, we will sing together “Comfort Me” by Mimi Bornstein-Doble. Song “Comfort Me” (Mimi Bornstein-Doble) (Lead participants in singing. As they sing, participants gently move around the space, touching and blessing with drops of water the important features of the space: bedposts, desks, tables, doorframes, and windows.) (Repeat or improvise verses as needed until everyone has had a chance to bless the space, then continue.) This space has been witness to so much of life: the living, the loving, the healing, and the dying. May it continue to be a sanctuary of living, loving, and healing. May this place be filled with love once more and provide support and care to any who need it. May those gathered here find joy amidst the sorrow and take solace in the blessing of sheltering walls and rafters, windows and hearths. Where there has been death, may there be new life. Let’s sing one more verse of “Comfort Me.” (Lead participants in singing.) Reclaiming Come, Spirit of Life, Be with us in this space that has held both joy and sorrow, life and death. Help us to honor and remember [Name] and live out the precious gift of life in recognition of them. May this space be a continued blessing, and may its walls and doorway, ceiling and floor be reclaimed as a place not only where death came, but where life also happened. As the Love that never lets go and never lets us down reminds us: All things can be made new, for those who are willing to brave the mystery and reclaim them. Help us to bless this space in honor of [Name] and in honor of those of us who remain here, in this space, on this side of the Holy Mystery. May it be so, and amen. Let us close by blessing the space with a song. Please join in singing “May Nothing Evil Cross This Door.” Song “May Nothing Evil Cross This Door” (Louis Untermeyer) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish this flame And bless this space to the continued use and care of any who dwell here. We release its past to the Mystery, and we welcome the future. May it be filled with love. Amen. (Extinguish the chalice.)