For Celebrating the Harvest Rev. Ariel Aaronson-Eves For Mark Cain and Michael Crane, with gratitude This ritual celebrates all the forces (divine, natural, human) that go into the creation of food. Inspired by the author’s experience as a farmer, it serves to strengthen participants’ connection to their local foodshed. Recognizing how often both people and planet are exploited in the production of food and that not everyone has easy access to fresh produce, it is intended as a harvest celebration to honor whatever local produce, grown with love, is available. It can be easily incorporated into a congregational worship service or used on its own, with any size group. Materials □ Fresh locally grown fruits and/or vegetables, in bite-sized pieces (e.g., pea pod, slice of apple), at least one for each participant □ Serving bowls or trays □ Hand sanitizer or serving utensils □ Responsive reading text □ Optional: Music Setup Be as aware as possible of any potential allergies or sensitivities, and have a variety of fruits and/or vegetables available. They should be washed, cut into bite-sized pieces if necessary, arranged in serving bowls or trays, and set at the front of the space or beside you. Provide serving spoons, tongs, or toothpicks for hygienic serving; hand sanitizer can also be conveniently located nearby. Depending on how the space is set up and on the needs of the group, the bowls or trays can be passed hand to hand by the congregation, carried from person to person by helpers, or kept at an altar with participants coming forward to them. In the latter case, recruit at least one helper to bring some to those who are unable to come to the altar. Distribute or project the text of the responsive reading. Script Opening Words Much of religious practice around the world is built on the sharing of food. The necessity of eating reminds us of our dependencies on each other and on forces beyond us. Practices such as participating in the Eucharist, observing kashrut, making offerings to ancestors, and others help us remember our place in the web of existence. It is a tangled web. Within our food systems, exploitation and oppression are entwined with love and care. There are trade-offs and delicate balances, questions of labor and land management, of intent and impact. Every bite we eat carries with it stories of suffering and stories of joy. Let us be mindful of the pain, even as we choose, in this moment, to lean into pleasure, to delight in the food that soon will touch our lips. This ritual of sharing food, of communion, brings us into connection with and awareness of the sacred web, acknowledging that Spirit of Life that runs through the food system and through our embodied experience of eating. Responsive Reading L EADER: All food begins with a seed, in its heart the stories of past generations and future promise, waiting to spring forth. Environmental pressures push and pull, shaping its response. But all that is needed is a seed, and air, and water. P ARTICIPANTS: All life stems from this. L EADER: We have evolved, with other species and the land, to arrive at this moment. Through careful observation and cultivation, Following our desires for beauty, for sustenance, for communion, Joining with the love of the universe to bring love to each other. P ARTICIPANTS: May this love heal us, heal our relations, heal our world. L EADER: We know not at what cost the farmer planted the seed, irrigated the field, cultivated the crop. What we know is that they did, and thanks to forces beyond them and beyond us, we have food today. P ARTICIPANTS: Because of someone’s desire to feed us, we eat. Sharing of the Fruits of This Land The produce of this land will now be passed among you [or “Please come forward to take a piece, or raise your hand and someone will bring a tray to you”]. Select one, and hold on to it until everyone has one, so that we may share the moment of tasting. (As people choose their fruit or vegetable, you may wish to play music, especially for a larger group that will take longer.) Blessing I now invite you to savor your fruit or vegetable, chewing it slowly and thoroughly, as I offer these words of blessing: Let us be conscious of flavors, textures, energy Of the simple pleasures of eating Of the miracle of photosynthesis, by which air and water are converted into food Let us be aware of the work of the farmer, who planted the seeds, tended the crop, harvested the greens Of the blood, sweat, and tears of making a farm Let us be aware of and thankful for the rain, and the whole water cycle Let us give thanks for the livestock whose manure fertilized these crops For the plants of seasons past, broken down into compost and resurrected For the earthworms and bugs of the soil, for bacteria, for fungi Whose work we cannot see and yet depend on Let us be grateful for our desires, which pull us outside of ourselves and into communion with other people, with other species, with other places Exposing us to new ideas, offering opportunities for growth and change May they lead us toward the pleasures of existence Let us eat together, recognizing that we never eat alone May we work for a world where everyone will always be able to enjoy such simple pleasures.