For Release from Prison, Jail, or Detention Rev. Jason Lydon This ritual is designed for welcoming one or more people out of prison, jail, or detention. It is intended to be a celebration, with family and community in attendance. The ritual can be adapted for as many focus people as needed. Materials □ Altar table for chalice and candles □ Chalice □ Tea lights, at least three for each focus person □ Taper candle □ Bowls of water, one for each focus person □ Towels, one for each focus person □ Paper, at least one sheet for each participant □ Markers, crayons, or pens □ Music Setup Set up the altar table with the chalice, the tea lights, and the taper candle for lighting the tea lights. Participants can be arranged either in a circle or in rows, theater-style. Set a bowl of water and a towel by each focus person’s place, and set paper and markers, crayons, or pens where they will be accessible to everyone. If any focus person was released from incarceration less than three months ago, be sure that they do not have to have their back to a door that is used for entering or exiting. Recruit a formerly incarcerated participant to do the chalice lighting. All quotes and readings in this ritual (aside from the biblical quote) come from currently or formerly incarcerated writers. Do not include additional writings from people who have not experienced incarceration. Consult with the focus people ahead of time to find out how they would like you to speak of their time incarcerated and the people they knew there. Some may have good memories of people who helped them; some may associate certain figures with pain or trauma; some may have had many friends inside, or only a few, or none. Do not assume that an individual had—or did not have—any particular experience of incarceration. Script Gathering Music (Choose one or two of the following to be playing as people come in.) • Prison Break (Taina Asili) • Freedom (Nicki Minaj) • I’m Like a Bird (Nelly Furtado) • Ella’s Song (Sweet Honey in the Rock) • Love (Mos Def) • God Bless the Child (Billie Holiday) • Changes (2Pac) Chalice Lighting (These words should be offered, and the chalice lit, by a formerly incarcerated participant.) As we gather in this ritual of healing, this ritual of release and freedom, we light our chalice together. (Light the chalice.) It is a blessing to be together. Our time together on this day is dedicated to honoring [Name(s)]. The journey from the outside of prison to the inside and then out again can be a lonely one. Though all of our lives are interconnected and the loss of even one to a prison cell can ripple outward to others, time for those inside can become frozen. During this ritual we will wash away some of the pain, burn away disconnection, and write a path forward. We gather with humility, reverence for life, and an openness to transformation. May we journey together with love. The Washing From the beginning of life, we have been held in water. Our bodies, our planet, and this bowl here are all filled with the sacred power of water. Ritual washing crosses religious traditions. When washing feet, hands, or body, one prepares for that which comes next. We are gathered here, in this moment, with [Name(s)], to witness this transition and their preparation for what comes next. [Name(s)], before you is a bowl of water. As you begin to wash your hands in this bowl of water, imagine washing away the isolation of prison cells. As the water moves between your fingers, imagine washing away the guards, the COs, the administration, all those who refused to see your humanity. As your hands bump against the glass and you feel the firmness of the bowl, imagine washing away the concrete and steel cages that kept your body locked away. (The focus person or people wash and dry their hands as the leader speaks.) As you dry your hands, I invite all gathered to join me in this affirmation, three times: “I am not forgotten. I am unafraid. I am free.” A LL: I am not forgotten. I am unafraid. I am free. [Repeat three times.] L EADER: Please join in singing “Circle ’Round for Freedom.” Song “Circle ’Round for Freedom” (Linda Hirschhorn) (Lead participants in singing.) The Flame of Remembrance The ancient prophet Isaiah spoke with righteousness about the need to set all the captives free. In chapter 61, verse 1, we hear Isaiah proclaim: The spirit of God is upon me, because God has anointed me; God has sent me to bring good news to the oppressed, to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and release to the prisoners. (Adapt this section to what you know about the focus person’s or people’s experiences and whether there are people or experiences they want to remember. Do not assume that you can safely mention “my cellie,” “my friends,” etc. without confirming in advance that doing so will not retraumatize anyone.) When returning to this side of the prison walls, one can experience pains of guilt. What about those still left behind? What about my cellie? What about my beloved? What about my friends? The questions can swirl around in our minds. At times the swirling can turn into a spiral downward, with moments of fear, loss, and confusion. Know this: you are not alone. Around us there are candles that await your spark. Light as many or as few as you would like. Each candle represents a person you want to offer love and care. During your time inside, did someone offer you a toothbrush with no strings attached? Did someone look out for you in the yard? Did someone make sure you had canteen even when your commissary ran out? Who must you not forget? Light a candle for them. You are welcome to share out loud who you are lighting candles for, or do this in silence. (Allow time for the focus person or people to light candles. Silence here is welcome, though you could also play quiet instrumental music.) (Once the focus person or people have finished lighting candles, invite the unison affirmation below.) L EADER: Please join in our affirmation. A LL: A spark to remember, a flame to illuminate the truth, a fire to warm the spirit. Writing and Drawing a Way Forward We have, before each of us, some paper and markers, crayons, or pens. One step toward healing from the trauma of incarceration can be imagining a world free from prisons. In the essay he wrote from his prison cell, Tiyo Attallah Salah-El offers these words: “Creating a new way of ‘Thinking About Prisons’ requires the best efforts, ideas, and experiences, and honest, careful, sharp, and critical reflection from all those who are willing to take on this daring and daunting task. We could and must construct the groundwork for future generations to build a world that is safe and just. Let us begin working at the edges of what is possible. Let us strive toward a new possibility.” Let us, in this sacred space, begin creating a new way. Use your paper to write, draw, or create what justice, healing, transformation, and accountability might look like without the violence of incarceration. What do we need? What do you need? Breathe into your imagination. Allow your body to guide you. Maybe you want to use your paper like an architect, creating new structures for liberation. Maybe you want to use your paper like a poet, finding just the right words to express your dreams. Maybe you want to use your paper like an artist, blending colors and shapes, or tearing it to create a picture of freedom. We will take fifteen minutes, even as we know that there are many lifetimes of work to express. (Allow fifteen minutes of time to create. Let everyone know when there is five minutes left, when there is one minute left, and when it is time to return attention to the group.) (When time is up, encourage everyone to briefly share what they created. When everyone who wishes to has shared, invite the group to sing.) Song “How Could Anyone” (Libby Roderick) Chalice Extinguishing Our time together is coming to a close, though our commitment to one another is only growing stronger. [If this is a Unitarian Universalist gathering, add “Unitarian Universalism is a religious tradition created by heretics and criminals. Our faith has persevered throughout history because our religious ancestors refused to be silenced.”] We know there is nothing salvific about punishment; we will not be saved by police or prisons. We keep each other safe. We do the work of healing and care. As we close, hear these words adapted from Mumia Abu Jamal. We are in need of a religion of Life that sees the world in more than merely utilitarian terms. A religion that reveres all life as valuable in itself; that sees Earth as an extension of self, and if wounded, as an injury to self. We need a religion that recognizes the interdependence of [humanity] and this world; which sees that the atmosphere surrounding our globe is the same air we breathe, and part and parcel of our lungs—that Earth’s water is no different from the saliva in our mouths. We need a religion that rediscovers the idealism that existed before institutionalism; to rediscover the primordial awe felt by ancient [humans] when [they] first beheld creation spiraling outside of [humanity’s] insignificant self. May we practice this religion together. Amen. Let it be so. Blessed be. (Extinguish the chalice.)