For the Season of Creative Dormancy Rev. Ron Phares This ritual is designed to be used as part of a congregational worship service in the late fall or early winter. It welcomes the oncoming darkness of winter as a time of deep internal breakdown, decomposition, re-creation, and creative dormancy. Materials □ Altar table □ Bowl for soil (preferably transparent) □ Smaller bowl that can be carried to participants □ Small cups of soil for participants who did not bring any □ Bowl of water Setup Announce well in advance that each participant should bring a small handful of soil from their home to this ritual. Place the altar table somewhere accessible to participants, and set the empty bowl and the bowl of water on it. Recruit a helper to carry a second soil bowl to participants who cannot come forward, and one to bring small cups of soil to participants who did not bring any. The Soil Communion element of this ritual is intentionally silent, to acknowledge that meaning need not be expressed in words, or in sound at all. The quiet is a reminder of the soil. Script Opening Words The planet that sustains us is the only known planet with living, breathing skin. That skin is called dirt. From a far enough distance away, we are indistinguishable from that planetary skin. From right up close, closer than our eyes can see unaided, it is the same. We are land with legs. Many of the ancients believed this too. Jewish, Christian, and Islamic traditions hold that the first human, Adam, was made of clay and breath; the name “Adam” means “earth being.” And now, all around us in this hemisphere, the earth is breaking itself down. But fields and gardens that appear fallow are actually quite lively as the internal processes of decomposition create rich, healthy soil. Let us, like earth, find life in the quiet internal churning of the breakdown. What in your life is dying? What do you need to let go of in order to allow more life into your world? A grudge? A regret? An attitude? A habit? A relationship? A status? A sadness? What is it that you will let decompose, so that its death can bring new life into your world? Put a name to it if you can. Remember what you have named it. And what will you plant in the compost it becomes? What seed will you push under that earth, that will use the soil as food, to grow into something new? Put a name to that seed. Remember it. Now you have two words: something that you are letting go to decompose, and something that you are planting to grow. Hold on to them. We will use them in the ritual to come. (Pause.) You were asked to bring a handful of soil from your home to this ritual today. If you forgot, or if you’re visiting, or if you need more soil for any reason, please raise your hand and a helper will bring you some now. (A helper distributes cups of soil as you continue speaking.) Without decay, there would be no soil. Without soil, no seed could flourish, no seed would be fed. Just so, parts of us must decay so that new parts can flourish. Chapters, themes, and characteristics of our identities must be allowed to compost so that fresh characteristics, themes, and chapters may flourish. Embracing our dissolutions is scary. They are a window into dying. But refusing to do so leads to suffering and prohibits new life. Why are we so afraid? Why is it so hard to trust our own becoming? The seeds of you need the decay of you. This ritual gives us some practice. Here we can ease into decay. Embrace it and trust the seeds. Trust the soil. Our home. Our place of rejuvenation and return. In this ritual we may return to our most fundamental home, the earth. Return to who you fundamentally are. Return to what you are in essence. Return to where you are born and reborn again. The home of your soul. The soil. Let us prepare for this return with song. Song “Return Again” (Shlomo Carlebach) (Lead participants in singing.) Soil Communion I will ask each section to come forward in turn and form a line over here, in front of this bowl. If you prefer not to come forward, raise a hand and a helper will bring our other bowl to you. (Indicate how participants should move through the space.) When you’re ready, with the bowl in front of you, pour your dirt into your hand. Feel its texture, its richness. Remember what you named in your meditation earlier that you will let go of this season. Press it into your soil … and then silently let it go, into the bowl. After that, recall the seed deep within, the seed that you trust. Find it in your heart and plant it in the soil with the tips of your fingers. Again, do this in silence. Seeds work unseen. We are of the earth. This is our body. Let us, like earth, find life in the quiet internal churning of the breakdown. Decomposition feeds the seed. What will you let go of in order to discover a new flourishing? What part of you will you let decompose, in order that its death may bring new life into your world? (Indicate that the first section should approach the altar. The ritual is performed in silence, without musical underscoring. Continue in silence until everyone has participated. Put the smaller bowl of soil on the altar table next to the main one, or empty it into the main one.) Blessing Here is the ground of our living and dying. Here is the stuff of us, our body, death and life, the nexus of creation and destruction, our creative dormancy. (Sprinkle water on the soil.) May this water be a blessing from our community upon our creative dormancy. May this water encourage growth. May we anticipate the new shoot and the flower, and find confidence in the grace of this world. May we trust the depths and call them into the light. (Close with a reprise of “Return Again.”)