Crafting Your Own Rituals This book contains over seventy rituals, but there is no limit to the moments in our lives, and in the lives of our communities, that we might want to mark with a ritual. We have offered rituals for many common and uncommon moments, but we also hope that this book will inspire and guide you to creatively develop rituals of your own for all the events, transitions, sorrows, and joys that you may want to honor. The steps below outline the process we use to craft a new ritual. Step 1: Grounding the Ritual Before you begin to think about what a ritual will look like, identify its overall purpose and its spiritual, emotional, and theological goals. Some questions to ask yourself at this stage are: • What is the ritual for? What transformation are you facilitating, or what transition are you marking? • Who is it for? Who will be participating? What words, actions, music, and symbols will have meaning for them? • What do you want participants to experience? How do you want them to feel when they leave? • What part of your and your participants’ values or theology does this ritual reflect? Step 2: Embodying the Ritual Once you are clear about the goal of the ritual, think about what words, actions, music, and symbols might embody that goal best. These elements are what take us out of our heads and into our bodies, making us participants rather than merely audience. You can read more in the introduction to this book about the importance of the embodied, participatory nature of rituals. Consider what the participants will do to embody the values or theology you have identified as the core of the ritual. What tangible object or action will help to embody this transition or transformation? Look through the rituals in this book for examples and ideas. Will you have participants handle bubbles, glitter, clay, stones, water, or something else? Will they write, eat, plant, light candles, hold hands, sing together, keep silence together? Choose an action to serve as the centerpiece of your ritual. Be sure that it suits your context, and that it is appropriate for your participants, keeping in mind their likely range of abilities, cultural and religious backgrounds, attention spans, etc. Step 3: Framing the Ritual The next step is to build out the rest of the ritual. Choose readings, songs, prayers, blessings, and so on to support the ritual action that is your centerpiece. Start by thinking about how the ritual will begin. How will people feel as they enter the space? Will they know what you and they are about to do, and why? It’s important to briefly explain the ritual and its importance before launching into it. This is a moment to help ground participants in what is about to happen and to help them begin to do their own meaning-making. Be sure to speak in a way that meets participants where they are; consider what language and level of complexity is appropriate in this setting. Use the first few elements—opening words, chalice or candle lighting, a reading or song or unison recital—to help participants enter into the spirit of the ritual and find meaning in it. Once you have oriented participants and grounded them in the ritual space, you can move on to the central ritual action. Make sure to tell participants clearly what they are supposed to do and why. Leaders sometimes forget that others don’t know the ritual as well as they do, and when participants are confused or unsure they cannot fully enter into the rich meaning-making experience of the ritual. After the central action has taken place, be sure to give people adequate time to transition out of the ritual space. An abrupt end can feel awkward or jarring. Take time to summarize what you just did, the transition you are marking or the transformation you are facilitating; reiterate the meaning-making you have offered and underline the values you have affirmed. Give people some space to integrate what just happened. This can be a good place for music or a time of silence, followed by closing prayers, blessings, benedictions, or chalice extinguishing words to help close out the ritual space. Step 4: Leading the Ritual Even the most beautifully written ritual can fall flat for participants if it is poorly executed. The “Practical Tips for Rituals” section of this book offers in-depth practical advice for rituals. We recommend reviewing it before leading your ritual.