For Burying or Scattering the Ashes of a Pet Rev. Caitlin Cotter Coillberg This is a ritual for burying or scattering the ashes of an animal companion. Materials If burying: □ Shovel □ Loose dirt to fill the grave □ Shroud or small box holding the body □ Optional: Stones or flowers □ Optional: Craft supplies, such as markers, paint and brushes, plain stones or small plaques, etc. If scattering ashes: □ Container of ashes □ Water for rinsing hands □ Towel Setup Your vet can help you with arranging cremation or storage of an animal’s body until you are ready. This is an outdoor ritual. Choose a location that is beautiful or meaningful to you, perhaps one connected to your life with this animal companion: a park or trail where you walked your dog, someplace with lots of birds your cat would have loved to watch or chase, a spot in your yard where you let your turtle or guinea pig run around, etc. If you need permission to bury an animal or scatter the ashes there, get it in advance. Make sure all participants will be able to access the location; think about issues like road access and, if someone will be attending by video, the strength of your phone or Wi-Fi signal. This ritual is intended to be done with at least two people; even small children can take part, though they may need help. If you wish, it can be modified for you to do on your own. You may want to call a friend or family member who knew your animal companion and ask them to be present with you as you move through the ritual. You could decorate the box, shroud, or container of ashes as part of this ritual. Use any nicknames your animal companion had, as well as its official name; remember it by everything you called it. Think of specific memories, images, and gratitudes you want to name and honor. If you will be burying a body, dig the hole in advance; it always takes longer than expected. You may want to look for pet cemeteries in your area. If you will be scattering ashes, check the weather forecast; you want some wind, but not rain or snow. Script FOR BURYING AN ANIMAL’S BODY Opening Words (Gather all those who wish to take part in this ritual around the grave.) Today we have gathered to bury our beloved [Name], and to remember what we loved about them, and all that we experienced together. We are so sad not to have them as a living companion on our journey through life anymore, and we treasure all the joy and comfort and laughter they brought us. [Name], today we are taking you on one last outing, and remembering you. Words of Grief and Gratitude [Name], we are so grateful we got to have you in our lives. We are grateful for the times you made us laugh, and all the times we could not help but pause to take in how wonderful and beautiful you were. We are so grateful for all of the ways you made us smile, and we miss you. [Name], we are so sad you died. We will remember you. We will remember how you looked when you slept, when you ate your favorite treats, when you looked back at us with your sweet, beautiful eyes. We will remember the sounds you made, and the way you felt under our fingertips when we petted you, and how you made us feel. We loved you. Today we release you into the earth, but you will not be forgotten. We hold our memories of you close, as we wish we could still hold you close. Burial (Carefully place the body in the grave.) I invite each of you to take a small amount of dirt in your hands and think about what you are most grateful for about [Name]’s time in your life. When you are ready, sprinkle the dirt on [Name]’s grave and, if you wish, say aloud what you are remembering about them. (Participants take turns sprinkling dirt on the grave. When everyone who wishes to has done so, sprinkle some dirt yourself.) [Name], thank you for [specific gratitude]. In grief and in gratitude, we release you. In grief and gratitude we came here today. May our tears and our laughter fill our hearts as [Name] once did. May we leave this place today knowing we are not alone in our grieving or our remembering, and that life is better because we have loved. (Fill in the grave. Once the animal is completely buried, move on to a time of sharing stories and memories.) Sharing Stories and Memories (Gather everyone around the grave again. Alternatively, you could gather everyone around a craft space and invite them to make or decorate items to mark the grave.) (Invite people to share memories and stories of your animal companion, and perhaps to place stones, flowers, or items they have decorated or made on the grave. You may wish to offer a memory first, to help start off. It is often best to remember a funny moment first: some piece of mischief your animal companion was prone to, or a time they got stuck somewhere amusing, or the holiday costume you put them into, for example.) Closing Words [Name], you are now beneath the earth but you remain in our hearts and memories. We are so grateful for all that you brought to our lives. FOR SCATTERING ASHES On the Way There (Gather participants together before going as a group to the spot where you will spread the ashes. This might mean gathering at the car before driving to an overlook, in a living room before moving together to the backyard, at a trail-head before walking to a stream bank, etc. Hold up the container of ashes for a moment.) Today we have gathered to release the ashes of our beloved [Name], and to remember what we loved about them, and all that we experienced together. We are so sad not to have them as a living companion on our journey through life anymore, and we treasure all the joy and comfort and laughter they brought us. As we head out to release these ashes, let us take time to share stories. [Name], today we are taking you on one last outing, and remembering you. Who has a story to share? (As you move toward the location you have selected, invite people to share stories about your animal companion. You may wish to offer one first, to help start off. It is often best to remember a funny moment first: some piece of mischief your animal companion was prone to, or a time they got stuck somewhere amusing, or the holiday costume you put them into, for example.) At the Site (Once you reach the site where you wish to spread ashes, test the wind by tossing something light into the air, like small dry leaves or dandelion fluff, or by holding out something like a small ribbon. It is very important to ensure the ashes will blow away from you and others. Once you have determined this, you can gather participants around the container of ashes, on its upwind side.) Words of Grief and Gratitude [Name], we are so grateful we got to have you in our lives. We are grateful for the times you made us laugh, and all the times we could not help but pause to take in how wonderful and beautiful you were. We are so grateful for all of the ways you made us smile, and we miss you. [Name], we are so sad you died. We will remember you. We will remember how you looked when you slept, when you ate your favorite treats, when you looked back at us with your sweet beautiful eyes. We will remember the sounds you made, and the way you felt under our fingertips when we petted you, and how you made us feel. We loved you. Today we release you into the [wind, water], but you will not be forgotten. We hold our memories of you close, as we wish we could still hold you close. Ritual of Release for Ashes I invite each of you to take a small amount of ashes in your hands, and think about what you are most grateful for about [Name]’s time in your life. When you are ready, release the ashes into the [wind, water]. (Participants take turns selecting and releasing small handfuls of ashes. When everyone who wishes to has done so, scatter the rest of the ashes yourself. [Name], thank you for [specific gratitude]. In grief and in gratitude, we release you. (Pour water over each person’s hands as you continue speaking.) In grief and gratitude we came here today. May our tears and our laughter fill our hearts as [Name] once did. May we leave this place today knowing we are not alone in our grieving or our remembering, and that life is better because we have loved. Closing Words [Name], you are now released to the [wind, water], but you remain in our hearts and memories. We are so grateful for all that you brought to our lives.