For Acknowledging Community in a Wedding Rev. Allison Palm This ritual is intended to be a part of a larger wedding or union ceremony. It is designed to acknowledge that the partnership exists in the context of community and to honor the role that others play in supporting the couple. Materials □ Small altar table to hold the tree, water, and other materials □ Small tree that can be easily planted in a pot or in the ground □ Pot with soil or a hole in the ground ready to plant the tree in □ Water in a container that is easy to pour from, with enough for all who will be offering blessings □ Optional: Cloth for the partners to clean their hands after planting the tree □ Optional: Music Setup Set up an altar table with all the materials needed. If you will be planting the tree in the ground, dig the hole beforehand and set up the table with materials next to it. Consider the needs of all the participants in the ritual as you set it up. Make sure the altar table is a comfortable height for everyone who will be participating and that the water container is not too heavy. Planting in a pot makes this ritual more accessible, as it removes the need to bend over to reach the ground. Consult with the couple to decide who will offer a blessing, and ask those people to compose one. In some cases, it may help to offer a template. Partners who use this ritual should consider how they will feel if the tree does not survive and should be assured that the length of the tree’s life is not indicative of the length of their relationship’s life. This ritual is written for two partners but could be adapted for more. Script All trees start from small seeds, whether dropped or borne willy-nilly by animals, water, or the wind; but once grounded, they can become one of the longest-lived things in the world, silent guardians of forests, parks, and even street corners in a crowded city. A partnership, too, starts from a small moment, from the meeting of another person. We meet thousands of people in our lives, but only sometimes does the relationship take root, growing, stretching like a seed grounding itself in the earth, and then growing strong and tall, reaching toward the sky. [Name 1] and [Name 2], your relationship began as a seed. Over the years it has taken root, as you have learned each other’s stories, cared for each other, and created a life together. Your relationship will continue to grow in the years to come, just as a tree adds circles to its trunk, holding steady through the seasons of life, reaching to the sky as you reach toward your future together. In honor of your partnership and love, the roots of your ever-growing relationship, I invite you to plant this tree now together. [Add details about the kind of tree it is or where it is being planted, as appropriate.] (The partners plant the tree. They may wish to have members of their families or of the wedding party help them or even plant it for them, especially if they would have difficulty doing so themselves.) Despite their dignified solitude, trees are never truly alone. They depend on water from the skies, the soil of the earth, and the activity of countless animals, birds, and insects. [Name 1] and [Name 2], your relationship is grounded in the fertile soil of the families and communities that nurtured you from childhood to adolescence and finally to adulthood. As you look out at those who have gathered here to witness your union today, may you feel the strength of those relationships and know that they will keep you grounded in your journey together. And we know that your relationship will continue to be fed by the communities that surround you. Just as trees cannot exist without the help of water, earth, sun, and wind, so too does any partnership need the support of family and friends to thrive. In that spirit, we, their community gathered here, are going to offer our blessings to this union by watering the newly planted tree of this partnership. [Name 1] and [Name 2] have invited a few people to offer blessings. [Identify and call forward the people who will do this.] (The designated people come forward one at a time, water the tree, and offer the blessings that they have prepared.) We now invite everyone forward to add their water and silent blessings for [Name 1] and [Name 2]. (Give any necessary instructions, including asking people to add just a few drops of water if the tree is in a small pot. You may want to play some music as people are watering the tree.) [Name 1] and [Name 2], may the blessings of this water and the love of your communities sustain you as your partnership and love continue to grow.