For the End of a Natural Disaster Season Rev. Nathan Ryan This ritual is for a congregational worship service once the seasonal threat of natural disasters is over: for example, at the end of hurricane season, fire season, or a terrible winter. The author held a version of it after a terrible hurricane season in Baton Rouge came to an end. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Small pieces of flash paper or dissolving paper □ Way to destroy the paper (bowl of water or a safely contained fire) □ Pens □ Items representing the recent threat □ Basket □ Music suiting the recent threat Setup Set up the worship space as usual. Put the basket and ritual items on the altar table. If it’s the end of hurricane season, for example, you might use a storm lantern, an umbrella, and a crumpled hurricane tracker map. Set up the mechanics of destroying the paper ahead of time. Distribute the small sheets of paper and pens as people enter the space. If people with limited mobility can’t access the altar, recruit a helper to collect their papers. This service was designed to be imbued with a small amount of indignant irreverence, to give people permission to be exasperated by what they experienced. The author has found that if it’s done with a respectfully contemplative overtone, the humor empowers the congregation in surprising ways. Script Opening Words Today is holy. It is made holy by your presence. It is made holy by our presence. If you are willing to join together in this holy space, please say, “We are.” P ARTICIPANTS: We are. L EADER: Are you willing to create a space for collective healing from whatever harm you have borne? P ARTICIPANTS: We are. L EADER: Are you hoping to mark an end to what was and be open to what is yet to come? P ARTICIPANTS: We are. L EADER: Then let us join together and be open to the innate divine that is already surrounding us. Let it find open hearts and healing souls. Come, let us worship. Song “Come, Come, Whoever You Are” (words by Rumi, music by Lynn Adair Ungar) Chalice Lighting Today we light this flame As a marker of the end of a terrible season, As a reminder that no matter how cold or wet or terrible it is, There is still light. You are still light. We are still light. We are stronger kindled together. (Light the chalice.) Invitation to Naming Naming is spiritually important. It takes something ambiguous and abstract, like a storm, and makes it concrete. It gives us something to wrestle with. More often than not, a weather event goes unnamed. Without a name we may struggle to properly grieve or move forward. We need a way to acknowledge what we just experienced. You’ve probably already named this weather event a thousand different names—not all church appropriate. I invite you to take the small sheets of paper you were given when you entered and write down one name for what we just experienced. Later in this service they will be read aloud. During this next musical interlude, please come forward and place your papers in the basket on the altar. If you need a pen, please raise your hand. If you are unable to bring your papers forward, please hand them to a neighbor or motion toward a worship leader, and we will collect them. Music and Placement (Play a song that matches your particular miserable weather season as participants come forward and place their sheets of paper in the basket.) Prayer The God that we know when we see hope, The God that we know when we feel held in love, Be with us on this day And help all of us who are struggling this season. Hold all of us who have lost someone or something this season. Hold all of us who desperately long for safety, For a clear path forward, For something that feels normal. Please help us to put this terrible season behind us. Please help us to find healing. Please hold us as we try to move past what was and into what is. Please steady our hearts So that we may be agents of healing and reconciliation. Amen. Song “All Will Be Well” (Meg Barnhouse) (Lead participants in singing.) Naming There is power in naming. There is power in knowing. We now invite you to settle and ground yourself in your space. Please join together in this prayerful reflection as we share our names for what we experienced. After each name is read, we will destroy the paper to symbolically let go of this season. (Read the names slowly, one at a time, preferably with quiet, instrumental music playing underneath your voice. Try to intersperse funny and serious ones. After reading each one, burn or dissolve the paper. Allow space for each name to carry the pain or anger it needs to carry.) This season has ended. We know that suffering does not end. We know you may be processing this for years. But today marks a change. Today marks a day we can start processing what we experienced. May today start the next chapter in our story. Song “Life Calls Us On” (Jason Shelton) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing “Take Courage, Friends” (Wayne Arnason) Take courage, friends. The way is often hard, the path is never clear, and the stakes are very high. Take courage. For deep down, there is another truth: you are not alone. (Extinguish the chalice.)