For the First Anniversary of a Death Rev. Heather Concannon and Rev. Allison Palm In honor of Katie Tyson This ritual is written for the first anniversary of a loved one’s death. It can be used by any group small enough to allow time for each person to share, generally up to about twenty-five participants. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Tea lights, at least two for each participant □ Small stones, at least one for each participant □ Basket for stones □ Two bowls of water □ Tray Setup Ask participants ahead of time to bring pictures or small mementos of the deceased to build a shared altar together. Set up chairs in a circle with an altar table in the center. You could put tea lights on the altar in advance, or have them in a basket or on a tray for participants to take and light. If you place them on the altar, set out at least one for each participant, according to your best guess of how many will be needed; do not overload or clutter the table (it’s unfortunate if too many remain visibly unlit) but be prepared to set out more before they run out (so that no one will feel bad about lighting more than one). A small portable altar (with a bowl of water and candles) can be created on a tray and carried to any participants who are not able to move to the center of the circle. Place it on the central altar at the end of each time of sharing. Script Chalice Lighting With remembrance and love for [Name] And love and care for one another We light this chalice. It is good to be together. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words Welcome, and thank you all for coming. As you know, [Name] died a year ago today, and we are here to honor this anniversary and to be together. This day brings forth many feelings. Some of us may be feeling celebration and joy for [Name]’s life, others of us may be feeling sorrow for their death and isolation around the turns that grief has taken over the past year. Some of us may be feeling all of these, or other emotions that are unnamed and perhaps unnameable. All our emotions are welcome here. We are here to both remember [Name] and share with one another the ways that we have experienced [Name]’s death. We are here to laugh together and to cry together—to be together on this day. Thank you for bringing your spirit and your heart to this gathering of memory and love. Please join in singing “Meditation on Breathing” to open our time together. Song “Meditation on Breathing” (Sarah Dan Jones) (Lead participants in singing.) Releasing The loss of a friend or loved one can take a very long time to heal, and the loss looks different for each of us throughout our lifetimes. While we will never forget [Name], there may be parts of our grief or loss that we wish to release. We will now release some of the pain of this loss: regrets, unresolved conflicts, anger, the despair of grief, loneliness, or questions that cannot be answered. (Pass around the basket of stones.) As we pass around these stones, please choose one. Once you have your stone, I invite each of you to think of the ways in which this loss has burdened you in the last year that you wish to release. As you hold the stone in your hands, imagine those burdens becoming one with the stone. (Give participants a few moments to meditate quietly with their stone.) I now invite each of you to come to the altar and drop your stone into this bowl of water. Water literally makes these stones less heavy, just as our burdens are lightened when they are shared with others. If you wish, you can tell us what burden you wish to release, or you may place your stone in the bowl in silence. If you prefer to have a bowl of water brought to you, just raise your hand. (After all who wish to have participated, continue.) We release these feelings that this loss has brought us, but not the memory of [Name]. May the pain and grief that we have released make space for celebration, memories, and love. Let us pray. Prayer Eternal spirit, Moving through our lives in unseen ways, Be present to us now. We gather with such a wide range of emotions. Some of us may be celebrating [Name]’s life, Others of us are still bewildered, longing for answers and connection. It is good to be together. It is good to gather to honor [Name]. Today, on the anniversary of [Name]’s death, we celebrate, laugh, affirm, cry, mourn. We pray that our love for [Name] allows us to always remain connected in memory to them. We pray for healing for ourselves, that over time, those moments of sorrow and grief may become easier burdens to carry. We are grateful for the time we had with [Name], though we may wish that we had had the gift of more years together. May we remain open to love, and connected to life. May we celebrate [Name], and give thanks for their life. May we know that we are held in the love of those gathered here. And may we know that we are held, together, by a Love that is beyond our understanding, but never beyond our reach. May it be so, and amen. Song “There Is a Love” (words by Rebecca Parker, music by Elizabeth Norton) (Lead participants in singing.) Remembering Today we gather to remember [Name], and to share the blessings they brought to our lives. Now we have a time to share our memories of [Name], our favorite stories about [Name], or the things we most miss about [Name] with one another. Our memories can bring us comfort and joy, and they are so often bittersweet, as we know that [Name] is no longer with us. I invite each of you to come forward and light a candle on the altar in honor of [Name]. You may light a candle silently, or you may share a memory, a story, or something you miss about [Name]. Feel free to light more than one candle or share more than one memory. If you prefer to have the candles brought to you to light, just raise your hand. (After all who wish to have shared in the ritual of remembering, continue.) May our memories of [Name] bring us some comfort and joy in our sorrow. We are blessed by these memories in their death, just as we were blessed by [Name] in their life. Song “Spirit of Life” (Carolyn McDade) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish these flames, but the light of [Name]’s life burns bright in our hearts. May we be comforted by our memories And held by our time together. Go in peace. (Extinguish the chalice and the candles of remembrance on the altar.)