For Honoring Grief and Gratitude Rev. Rachael Hayes This ritual of grief and gratitude is designed for a congregational worship service but could be adapted for individuals, families, or small groups. It is suitable for all ages. Honoring many types of grief and gratitude, it helps participants recognize that we may be holding many types of grief at once and that grief and gratitude are interrelated. Materials □ Altar table □ Sliced bread, one slice for each participant □ Trays for bread □ Cups of water □ Chime or bell □ Music Setup There should be a visual focal point, which can be an altar containing a chalice and other service elements. If you are not doing this ritual as part of a congregational worship service, you may want to open with a chalice lighting. The ritual is well suited for celebration in the round, but it may work in any space where people gather to hold grief in community. Since eating bread may make participants thirsty, it is helpful to have water available. The script can be divided for multiple leaders. Recruit helpers ahead of time to pass out the bread. Unless you are certain that no one will need them, provide gluten-free and allergen-free bread options. This ritual may also be performed by taking sips of water. Decide whether you will have live instrumental music or recorded music, and arrange for it. Script Opening Words There is so much grief. We lose loved ones. Injustice is everywhere. The planet struggles to hold us. This grief is here with us, whether we acknowledge it or not. Francis Weller, in his book The Wild Edge of Sorrow, writes of five gates of grief, five ways we encounter the grief that moves us individually and brings us into community with everyone who grieves in a communal hall of grief. Each individual grief is a passageway into this larger experience of communal grief. Let us journey through these gates, these passages, together, to be together in our grief. On the way back from this communal hall of grief we will turn toward the gratitude that is intertwined with these griefs. Just as our grief and gratitude become part of us, we will mark our experience of grief and gratitude by eating bread together, and the bread we eat will become part of the strength we take from this day. Everyone will get a slice. (Explain any allergens and describe the alternative breads available.) And if you prefer not to eat bread, we invite you to take a small sip of water instead. The helpers will make sure everyone gets a slice of bread or a cup of water, or both if you wish. Please wait to eat and drink until we are all called to do so together. (Helpers pass out bread and water.) There will be ten times in the service where you are invited to take a bite. Which means ten bites—or sips of water, if you prefer. The chime will ring, and as you hear the chime, then eat or drink. There is a silence that is more than waiting to speak. Together, let us build a holy silence where our hearts can listen to their own beating. Breathe in. Breathe out. Feel your weight in your chair. Trust it to hold you. Pour your silence into our larger silence. (After a short silence, play some instrumental music.) The First Gate of Grief The first gate of grief, the one we acknowledge most often, is the loss of someone or something we love. Those who have loved us, those who have inspired us, those who have comforted us. The love continues on, even though we no longer know how to reach the beloved. This grief becomes so clear in the seats left empty in holiday gatherings, those we wish we could have one more conversation, meal, or adventure with, those whose presence meant so much, those whose existence meant the world to us. There will never be another like them. We love them, and we have lost them. For all we have lost, we mourn. To mark your grief for those you have loved and lost, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Second Gate of Grief The second gate of grief is the places within us that have not known love. For every time we could not be who we truly are, had to cover up a part of ourselves, we feel grief. For the times we have been rejected. For the times we could not be known and for the times we were unloved because of who we are. We mourn for LGBTQ+ youth kicked out of their homes or harmed by those who claim to love them. We mourn for those who found abuse where they should have found love. We mourn for those who are afraid to be themselves or to love whom they love. We mourn for those who died of hate or cruelty, and for those who fear persecution and abandonment, and for the places within us that have not known the love that we need. To mark your grief for the places within you that have not known love, to dedicate yourself to offering that love to others, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Third Gate of Grief The third gate of grief is the sorrows of the world. What is my personal grief when faced with pandemic, fire, famine, war, and genocide? It is still grief. There are many passages into this hall of grief, and we can meet each other at the common altar. The sorrows of the world connect us to each other and bring us together to mourn. We mourn wildfires, hurricanes, earthquakes, and the sorrows of our beloved earth. We mourn the systems of violence in our culture. We mourn white supremacy. We mourn poverty and hunger and war. This too is grief, with us in every moment. To mark your grief for the sorrows of the world, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Fourth Gate of Grief The fourth gate of grief is what we expected and did not receive. Not so much a thing we had and lost, but a disappointment. A depth of community we don’t know how to find. An emptiness or hollowness we don’t know how to fill. A relationship that did not last. A child we wished for but did not have. A chance that didn’t come. For the times when belonging did not come or was not enough, for the times when community was not deep enough to fill our need, we mourn. To mark your grief for all you expected and did not receive, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Fifth Gate of Grief The fifth gate is ancestral grief, the losses of those who came before us. Each of us has ancestors who lost their homeland: some when they chose to move to this continent, some when they fled their homes as refugees, some when they were abducted and enslaved, some when they were forced from their land by violence. Each of us has ancestors who lived this story, or we lived it ourselves. Each of these stories bears its own trauma and loss. We acknowledge that for many of us, our ancestors not only suffered but caused others to suffer. We therefore carry not only their own grief, but also grief for the harm they did. We mourn for the trauma our ancestors experienced, and for the trauma our ancestors caused. We mourn the ways this trauma is passed down into the present day, in the continued oppression of Black, Indigenous, and other People of Color. We mourn for what all of us have lost in a culture that values the idea of whiteness over what any of us actually are. For the many ancestral griefs, coming to us from our ancestors of blood and our ancestors of spirit, we mourn. To mark the ancestral grief that lives inside you, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell. Wait until people have finished eating before continuing.) Moving to Gratitude Those were the five gates of grief. Breathe in. Breathe out. I won’t ask you to eat any more grief today. Let us return to the holy silence we found before. Breathe in. Breathe out. Let your heart listen to its own beating. Feel your weight in your chair. Feel the earth holding you tight with gravity. In this silence, you are known and loved beyond all words. (After a short silence, play some instrumental music.) For each of Weller’s gates of grief, there is a corresponding gate of gratitude that leads us back into that great hall of meaning and worth, back to our common altar. There is no need to mourn the things that do not matter. We mourn things, people, and events of worth and meaning. For the chance to hold this meaning, to say, “yes, this matters, there is goodness as well as sadness,” we may find ourselves grateful. Gratitude may also help us hold our grief, connect us to goodness when there is so much to mourn. The First Gate of Gratitude For the love we share with others, we give thanks. There is so much to love in this life. For the freedom to love as we will. For beloved family members and friends. For all those who touch our lives and inspire us, we give thanks. To mark your gratitude for those you love, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Second Gate of Gratitude For the love we have received, the love that has nurtured us to this very moment, we give thanks. Love has carried us through so many moments to be here now. For compassion, nurture, and companionship. For the love that has met us along the way, for the love that has journeyed with us, we give thanks. To mark your gratitude for the love you have received, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Third Gate of Gratitude For the goodness in the world, for that which is beautiful, for that which inspires wonder and joy, we give thanks. The goodness of the world comes to us in nature, in the earth’s cycle of seasons, rest and growth and rest, in the delight of experience, and in our fellow human beings. For the goodness that we have met in ourselves and in our many experiences of this life, we give thanks. To mark your gratitude for the goodness in the world, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Fourth Gate of Gratitude For the community we have found, for all the places where we are known and loved and can be ourselves. For the times when we know we have enough and the times when we know we are enough. For the sense of belonging to a place, to a community of love, we give thanks. To mark your gratitude for community, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) The Fifth Gate of Gratitude For the joy of our ancestors. Our very presence in this moment is the triumph of our ancestors. That their blood and spirit has carried forward in you and through you to this day is their joy, just as you will find joy in those who by blood or spirit descend from you. For this joy we give thanks. To mark your ancestors’ joy alive in you, you are invited to take a bite of bread. (Sound the chime or bell.) (After a short silence, play some instrumental music.) Closing Words Breathe in. Breathe out. Our grief is holy. Our gratitude is holy. The earth is holy. We are whole. We live deeper into humanity, into our connection with earth, with each other, with the past, and with the future, when we remember the sacred. We bless our grief and our gratitude, because love has many faces. Blessed be. Amen.