For Preparing to Give Birth Rev. Elizabeth Carrier-Ladd Childbirth can be one of the most profound moments in one’s life. As we prepare for it, there can be power in gathering with a community of beloveds to gather strength and love for the process. The purpose of this ritual is to help ground the pregnant person and surround them with love and strength in preparation for the experience of labor and birth. Whether this ritual is a part of a larger gathering or not, be intentional and mindful about who the pregnant person and their close family want to be present. Materials □ Chalice □ Optional: Item to be blessed for the pregnant person to have with them at the birth Setup This ritual can be done with or without touch, and can be just as powerful either way. What matters is what would be most meaningful to the focus person. Ask them ahead of time whether they would like hands on them or near them, and which body part or parts others should touch or gesture toward: belly, heart, hand, shoulders, or something else. If you wish, invite the focus person to choose an item to be blessed. This ritual asks participants to move to the focus person to provide a blessing. It could be modified by having the focus person move to each participant, or by inviting participants to say if they would like the pregnant person to come to them. Keep the circle clear of unnecessary objects so that everyone can easily move around. Script Chalice Lighting From a tiny cluster of cells, a life A whole being has grown Has been becoming Has prepared to emerge from within our beloved [Name]. In honor of this life Their spark of the divine that we can already sense And the love we already feel toward them We light this chalice. It is so good to gather in celebration of new life. (Light the chalice.) [Name], will you please place one hand on your heart and one hand on your belly. This child has grown slowly within you. You have made room for them. You have changed the way you walk. Your organs have moved. Your center of gravity has shifted. You have been rearranged in a way that cannot be undone. You will not go back to where you were before. This journey has already changed you. And birth will change you further. You are capable and strong. You will welcome your [or “this”] child with love and grace. There may be fear and anxiety in this transition. And you are grounded in love. You are held in love. You are love. Inside you is a great well of peace that can carry you through whatever comes. Song “Meditation on Breathing” (Sarah Dan Jones) (Lead participants in singing.) Embodied Meditation Let us all take a moment to get centered in our own bodies. Let us first find a comfortable position. Maybe you wish to be seated on a chair or on the floor, or maybe you’d prefer to lie down or stand tall. Find the position that is calling to you. (Pause to let participants settle themselves into position.) And first just check in with your whole body. Take a few rounds of breath. Now, let us move our awareness to wherever we touch the earth. Noticing the sensations where we connect to the earth and finding our own grounding. Finding a sense of safety in our connection to the ground. A sense of knowing that all will be well, no matter what comes. A sense of deep calm amidst the storms of life. Breathe. I invite us all to put one hand on our hearts. To connect to the love that overflows from within us. To feel the capacity of our own love. The power of it. The force it holds for transformation. Breathe. Here may we feel that we are safe. Here may we feel that we are loved. May we know that we are powerful forces of love in the world. May we know that all we must do is breathe. Breathe. May it be so. Blessings We invite each of you to offer your blessing to [Name] and the baby. Birth is something that the baby and the pregnant person do together. [If the focus person is holding an item to be blessed] [Name] is holding an item of meaning to them that will accompany them to the birth space, as a reminder of this moment and this community that blesses them and journeys with them into this moment of transition. [Describe the item if the focus person wishes you to.] As you bless this person and the [or “their,” “her,” “his”] baby, this item will be imbued with your love and blessings. As you feel so moved, please come to [Name] and rub your hands together like this. [Rub your palms together quickly.] Then put your warm, energy-filled hands on [or “a few inches from”] [Name]’s [chosen body part]. You are invited to share a few words of blessing. You may choose your own words, or you can say something like “You are a gift. This baby is a gift. May you be held in love as you bring this baby into the world.” You may come forward, one at a time, now. (One by one, participants come forward to offer their blessings.) Chalice Extinguishing As we extinguish this flame, may you remember: You are enough. You are strong. You are powerful beyond measure. You are grounded in love. You are held by this community. [If the pregnant person is planning to raise the child] You are exactly the [mother, father, parent] that your child needs. (Extinguish the chalice.)