For a Baby Who Has Died or Will Soon Die Rev. Rose Maldonado Schwab This is a ritual to use when a baby has died or is soon to die. It requires minimal materials or setup so that it can be used in the moment when it is needed. Materials □ Optional: Water or oil □ Optional: Swaddling cloth Setup If you are in a medical setting, make sure the nurses know that you are starting to do a ritual, and create a private, protected space however you can: close the door, dim the lighting, etc. Prepare the water or oil and the cloth if you are planning to use them. If the baby cannot be present (for instance, if it is in the morgue, or is not in a condition to be seen or held), you can still do the ritual, asking participants to hold the image of the baby in their minds and hearts. Script Opening Words Sweet one, you have fought hard to stay with us. Listen to the fervent wishes for your well-being that fill our hearts. As we prepare ourselves to bless you, hear this prayer from your [parent, parents] who [has, have] loved you with such love, the nurses and doctors who did everything in their power to care for you [your siblings who waited expectantly for your arrival], and this world itself which needed you to witness it and needed the blessing of your presence. Naming We name this child today, so that we will remember them coming among us. What name do you give this child? P ARENT(S): [I, We] name them [Name]. L EADER: Oh, child whom we have barely known, we call you [Name]. Receive this name as a sign of your uniqueness to us and to this world. By this name you are known, and will be remembered. Blessing of the Body Great love, you lift us up throughout our life’s journey. Send your love to us and into this [oil, water] as we bless [Name]. (Invite participants to anoint each part of the baby’s body as you name it.) We bless your face, [Name], for the color your eyes would be, for their lashes, and for the light and spark of spirit that will not shine within. For the voices that echoed around you in the womb, for the sounds of watery noises, and music and thunder. We bless your face, that you might somehow have known the love we sang to you. We bless your mind, [Name], that you might know how much we wanted to teach you. That you might know the wonders of the universe. We wish we had been able to be the ones helping you learn the important lessons you need to know. We bless your heart, [Name], that you might know how much we love you. That you will always be carried in our hearts. We bless your arms and legs, [Name], for their little toes and little bones, your precious body that would let you move in your own way, and we grieve for the earth they will not move upon. We bless your hands, [Name], for the skill and grace they could have possessed. We wish we had been able to hold hands with you as you grew and learned to use them in the way that best suited you. We grieve for all that you will not sense, the ground you will not walk, the tools you will not wield, the love you will not know. Let us mourn, weep, and sit in silence with this precious babe, one last time. (Allow several moments of silence.) Closing Prayer Compassionate and loving one, give strength and comfort to this family and all those who grieve the loss of this child. In their sorrow and pain may they experience a healing presence. May they know that they are surrounded by unending love. Amen, and blessed be.