For Direct Action Rev. Elizabeth Nguyen This ritual is to bless and support a person or group engaging in direct action or civil disobedience. It developed from the author’s own experiences participating in, and supporting others’ participation in, acts of noncooperation, protest, disruption, and community defense. It’s intended to be flexible and adaptable; it can be used in whole or in parts or expanded, depending on the need of the moment. The methods of direct action and civil disobedience are neutral. Any action can be grounded in love and justice and move our world toward liberation and thriving, or it can be grounded in hegemony, oppression, state violence, genocide, or hate. This ritual is intended to support the intentional disruption of unjust laws, practices, or actions through acts of love that confront systems of oppression. Materials None Setup This ritual can be done as part of training or preparation to engage in direct action, in the days or weeks beforehand. It can also be used in a quiet moment a few hours or a few moments before an action, or even while actually doing direct action. Consider whether law enforcement are present and whether anything you say (or ask others to say) could incriminate, or have other legal consequences for, the person or people acting or anyone else, including organizers, trainers, supporters—and you yourself. The ritual is written with spaces for you to fill in details and specifics relevant to the action. This is intended to be a gentle space to ground participants in their bodies and communities, acknowledge their fears and the challenges they face, and connect them to their vision of the world they are fighting for. Script Grounding (Begin with a way for participants to pause and ground themselves. Some ways to do this are:) • Making eye contact • Feeling their weight pressing them to the ground • Bringing attention to a specific part or parts of the body • Taking a centering breath, or three, or ten • Humming together • Closing or lowering eyes • Holding silence for thirty seconds or several minutes • Holding hands, touching one another’s shoulders, bumping elbows, or making some other physical connection (with consent) • Singing a song • Doing three neck rolls • Stretching or making another movement (If you have more time, consider doing several of these. When it feels right, move on to the blessing.) Blessing [Name(s)], as you take this action for love and justice, you do not act alone. [I, We] give thanks for [name the teachers, trainers, activists, leaders, and individual community members whose lineage this action is in or who it is dedicated to]. You are part of a long struggle toward liberation. Act with humility, knowing you are [one, a few] of many. Do what is yours to do. Many fears, doubts, questions, challenges may be part of this moment. We acknowledge them, and we know that many have had those same fears, doubts, questions, challenges and have acted anyway. We act anyway. Know that you are worthy and beloved, And nothing can take that away from you, As we fight for a world where we are all free and safe and well and thriving, Act by act. (End the blessing with a phrase that is relevant to the action. This could be a line from a chant or a song, a grounding phrase, or the core messaging or goal of the action, such as “Water is life,” “Not one more deportation,” or “Black lives matter.” Then close with another form of shared grounding, either the one you used at the beginning or a different one.)