For Blessing a Temporary Home after a Disaster Kate Wilkinson This is a home blessing for temporary housing after a disaster or relocation. It is written for families with children, but it can also be used with minor adaptations by other households or individuals. This ritual was originally created for a family whose house had burned down, to help the children feel more at home in their temporary housing. Materials □ Optional: Water to bless each part of the home. (If this ritual is being done in a Unitarian Universalist setting, Water Communion water would be appropriate to use.) □ Optional: A phone or camera to take a picture Setup Review the script with the focus people ahead of time and personalize it as needed. It is written to begin in the living room, but if the family mostly spends time in a different room, you may want to begin there. If you are using water to bless the home, make sure it is in a portable container that has a wide enough mouth to dip fingers into. Script (Gather in the living room.) Today we are gathered to bless our temporary home. Dear couch, You’re not the couch we are used to, but we are glad to have you in our home. We look forward to collapsing on you at the end of a long day. We look forward to snuggling up on you to watch movies together. We look forward to lying under a blanket on you when we don’t feel well. Thank you for holding our family with your cushions! (Optional: Invite family members to dip their fingers into the water and sprinkle it over the couch) (Move to the kitchen.) Dear kitchen, You’re not the kitchen we are used to, but we are glad to have you in our home. We look forward to making meals to feed our family here. We look forward to nourishing our bodies with food prepared here. We look forward to telling each other about our day at the dinner table here. We look forward to late night cups of tea here. Thank you for being the center of our new home. (Optional: Invite family members to dip their fingers into the water and sprinkle it over the kitchen.) (Move to a bedroom.) Dear bedrooms, You’re not the bedrooms we are used to, but we are glad to have a place to sleep. We look forward to having good dreams here. We look forward to getting rest here to recharge our bodies. We look forward to whispered conversations on pillows. We look forward to quiet hours of playing within your walls. Thank you for sheltering us at night. (Optional: Invite family members to dip their fingers into the water and sprinkle it over the bedrooms.) (Move to the bathroom.) Dear bathroom, You are not the bathroom that we are used to, but we are glad to have a place to wash up. We look forward to refreshing showers here. We look forward to giggling while we brush our teeth. We look forward to having a private moment to ourselves in here. We look forward to looking in this mirror each day to see how we have grown. Thank you for the convenience of running water and a flushing toilet! (Optional: Invite family members to dip their fingers into the water and sprinkle it over the bathroom.) (You can add any additional blessings you’d like as is relevant to the space you are blessing.) (After blessing the individual parts of the house, gather in the space that you consider the heart of the home.) Dear new home, You are not the home we are used to, and we don’t plan to be here forever. But for the next [period of time], you are our home. The place where we gather at the end of each day. The place where we dream for the future. The place where we do our homework. The place where we come together as a family. Thank you for being here for us in our time of need. Within your walls we will laugh and play and grow. You are not our forever home, But we know that home is where we are together. (Optional: Invite family members to dip their fingers into the water and sprinkle it over each other.) (Optional: Take a family photo in the heart of your temporary home and frame it.)