For Breaking Ground on a Building Project Rev. Tricia Brennan Breaking ground for a new congregational building can be a time of excitement, fatigue, and hope. This is a multigenerational ritual consisting of two parts, each of which can be used on its own. The first part seeks to place the project in the context of previous building losses, changes, and rebuilds and can be done as part of a congregational worship service, during the time usually reserved for a Time for All Ages or other child-friendly element. The second part seeks to nourish the hopes of the congregation as the new build is about to start and can be done immediately after the end of a congregational worship service, as the congregation processes out to where the new build will happen. Both emphasize what congregations can accomplish by dreaming and working together. The ritual should be led by a minister, religious educator, or lay leader, ideally someone involved in the building project. The ritual assumes that the new building will be close to the current one. If people will need time, and possibly transportation provided, to get from the old location to the new one, adapt it accordingly. The author is grateful to Louise Marcoux, former director of religious education at the Unitarian Church of Sharon, Mass., with whom she created a number of rituals, including a version of this one. Materials □ Children’s building blocks, approximately 30–40 of various sizes, divided among four baskets that children can carry □ Table for the building blocks □ Photos of the congregation’s previous buildings, if possible □ Two medium to large bowls of water (If this ritual is being done in a Unitarian Universalist congregation, Water Communion water would be appropriate to use) □ Small paper cups, at least one for each participant □ Two ladles to fill the cups with □ Two sturdy tables for the bowls of water Setup Congregations with long histories have typically bought, sold, renovated, and lost buildings along the way. They might have experienced a fire or other trauma, chosen or been forced to move, or have flourished to the point that they needed to buy or remodel a building to accommodate their growth. Knowing as much as you can about this history will enable you to make this ritual deeper and richer. The script is written with some specific historical events; adapt and personalize it to speak to the circumstances and history of your congregation. This ritual requires fourteen or more helpers, depending on the congregation’s history. You may want to recruit and brief some or all of them ahead of time, or call for some or all of them to volunteer in the moment, depending on the culture and flexibility of your congregation. You will need: • Four children, to bring the baskets of blocks forward in the service • People of a range of ages to build models with the blocks, in one or more groups of four • Two adult helpers, ideally leaders of the building project, to hold the bowls of water for the blessing and carry them outside during the recessional • Four other adult or older teen helpers, to carry the cups outside and assist with the outdoor water ritual Before the worship service starts, mark off the perimeter of the new build, perhaps by digging a narrow trough or laying out colorful cord or ribbon, and set up the two tables for the bowls of water outside. Ideally, place them at opposite ends of the new build’s perimeter, making sure to allow for an easy flow of people coming to get cups of water and pouring them around the perimeter. A building project is often sparked by the old building’s lack of accessibility. Though outside events may be more accessible, be sure that appropriate seating is available for those who need a seat, and an accessible path is evident. Put the table for the building blocks at the front of the worship space, allowing space for four people to stand around it. You may want to provide stools to stand or sit on. Put the two bowls of water somewhere out of the way but accessible in the worship space. If you have photos of previous buildings, display them or place them where you can easily hold them up to be seen. Script Building Our Past and Future Would [names of child helpers] please bring up their baskets of blocks which we will use today? You can place them by the table on the altar. Thank you. (The children bring up the baskets and then join the rest of the congregation.) As we all know, we are soon going to start building our new [name of new space]. This is a very exciting time for us! Can anyone say why we are doing this? (Invite responses from participants.) This may be the only time many of us here can remember this sort of big change happening in our community, but in fact it is not the first time. Before we talk about that, though, I want us to remember that before there was a church on this land, and before anyone who was a part of this [name of congregation] was alive, there were people living here. Can someone tell me the name of the Indigenous people living here? That’s right. Long before we or even our great-great-grandparents were here, the [name of Indigenous people] lived, worked, played, celebrated, built homes, worshipped, and died in this region. We and this faith community, [name], came later. [If your community has a standard land acknowledgment, you could use it here instead.] Here is a picture of the very first church building of the [name of congregation]. I bet someone here knows the year this congregation was founded and the church you see was built. (Listen for or supply the year.) Can our first four volunteers come forward and work together, using the blocks, to make something that looks like this church? You have three minutes! While they work, let’s remember what we know about our church back then. (As the volunteers come forward and start working, guide other participants in discussing things like the name of the first minister, the number of people in the first congregation, where its first building stood, and so on. After three minutes, or whenever the volunteers finish their work, wrap up the conversation.) Good work, builders! You can return to your seats, thank you. Now, churches can be built using all kinds of materials, like brick, stone, wood, steel, clay; it all depends on what is available in the area. Here where we live, there were lots of trees, so churches were generally built of wood. And that means that churches in this area were often destroyed by—what? Yes, that’s right, fires. The original church, built in [year], sadly was lost in a fire in [year]. Can I have four more volunteers come up to take down this building and build the next church building as we tell that part of our story? You have three minutes! Here is a picture of the next church building, constructed after the fire, that you can use as a guide. (As the volunteers come forward and start working, use questions like the following to prompt more discussion among the other participants.) How do you think the members of [name of congregation] felt when their church burnt down? Do you think they ever thought of just giving up and not having a church anymore? What do you think kept them going? We do know that they worked together to create something new after they lost their first church. When people work together, each taking a piece of the work—just like these four volunteers are working together, and like all the many, many volunteers today are working together on our new building project—it is amazing what can happen! (After three minutes, or whenever the volunteers finish their work, wrap up the conversation.) Hey, good work, builders! Thank you. You can return to your seats. (If the congregation has had many homes, then you may want to discuss more of them, as time allows, before moving on to the current build. Show a picture of the project.) Now here’s a picture that probably looks familiar to you—what is it? (Allow a moment for responses.) That’s right. It is the design of the new [name of build] that we are just about to start building. Can we have four more volunteers to come up and do their best to alter what is here to make it look like what we will soon have? You will have three minutes! (Continue speaking as the volunteers come forward and start working.) You know, you have to really want to have a new building to go through all the work to make it happen. You have to have a powerful vision of what you believe your community can become with that new space. Can I hear from three people, in just one or two sentences, why they really want this new building to be built? (Invite answers from the congregation and name again the originating vision. After three minutes, or whenever the volunteers finish their work, wrap up the conversation.) All right, take a look at what this group of builders created in just three minutes! Give them a hand! Thank you! As our builders sit down, please join in singing “We Are Building a New Way.” Song “We Are Building a New Way” (Martha Sandefer) (Lead participants in singing. Once the song is over, the worship service continues as usual.) Blessing Our Future (At the close of the worship service, two of the leaders of the building project bring the two bowls of water forward. They are joined by the last four adult or teen volunteers. All six should stand in front of or beside you, facing the congregation.) In a moment, I will offer a prayer over this water, which we will use to bless the perimeter of the new building. But first we will sing our final hymn, “Sing Out Praises for the Journey.” We will sing the first verse here in this space together. Then [names of the two people holding the bowls of water], the other helpers, and I will exit as we sing the second verse. [Name 1] will go to one end of the perimeter and [Name 2] will go to the other end, each joined by two helpers. Everyone else, please recess out while you are singing the third verse. Once outside, please go to one of the two teams of water carriers, who will give you a cup of water. Bring your water to a spot on the perimeter, and take a moment to think of your hopes for this new building, and your vision for our congregation’s future. Then thoughtfully pour the water in your cup on the perimeter, blessing what is to come. (Add instructions about what they should do after they are done, such as come back inside for fellowship hour.) And now I bless this water that we will use to bless our hopes and plans. Spirit of Life, found in this water here and water everywhere, found in this congregation’s desire for [name the originating vision], found in the dreams and hopes of people everywhere who yearn for justice and freedom for all, for care of the earth and its creatures, for love of our children and all children, bless this water in these bowls, and bless the work we feel called to do, here, together, in this community. We are not perfect and we may make mistakes, but like our forebears we choose to work together, We choose love, We choose to move forward in faith, adding what is ours to give to make our world better for all. And let the people say amen. Song “Sing Out Praises for the Journey” (Mark M. DeWolfe) (Go outside with the helpers, followed by the congregation, as described above.)