For a Partner Near the End of Life Rev. theresa rohlck Dedicated with love to Victor Hola and Scott Ferguson This is a blessing to offer when someone in a partnership is nearing end of life or has begun hospice or palliative care, as a way to help process anticipatory grief. The ritual is very intimate; it can be for just the partners and a leader, or for a small group of close friends or family. This ritual was created after a conversation with partners who were searching for ways to both honor their life together and imagine life for one partner after the decease of the other; it could be adapted for a relationship of more than two partners. Materials □ Small altar table or space □ Chalice □ Small stones, one for each participant plus a few extra □ Small bowl to hold the stones □ Small drawstring bag to hold the stones (ideally something beautiful and appropriate for the partners) □ Water in a small bottle that can be tightly closed □ Towel □ Optional: Music that is significant to the partners Setup Put the bowl on the altar table or in the altar space such that it can be seen by all present. Put one stone in it for each person present, including the partners and the leader. Script Chalice Lighting We light this chalice today in celebration of [Name 1] and [Name 2]’s partnership. May the light remind us that love is what burns brightest here. (Light the chalice.) Today, this intimate yet public recognition of these partners’ love for each other is important as a moment where we can create space for, and give voice to, the complex emotions we all are holding, knowing that this union, in the shape we know it now, will soon come to an end. Optional Reflection on the Partnership (You might continue with a short reflection on partnership, personalized to fit the partners’ story.) Blessing I invite us into a ritual to bless this partnership. Please, each, take a stone. (Offer the bowl of stones first to the partners, then to the other participants.) If you would, hold the stone, feel the weight in your palm. The stone is solid, unwavering, as is our support for [Name 1] and [Name 2]. Take a moment in silence to imbue that stone with all the love you possibly can. Breathe a message into the stone for these partners. When they need to be reminded that they are not alone, they each can hold any one or all of these stones. (Allow sufficient time for this. Do not rush.) When you are ready, place your stone in this bowl. (Offer the bowl to participants and have them gently set their stones in it. End by having the partners place their stones in it as well. If the partners wear wedding rings and are willing to remove them [Name 1], [Name 2], you may now place your wedding rings on top of these stones. [Name 1], [Name 2], I have brought you water. [Name any significance the water’s source has.] This water symbolizes the unbroken line of support our community has to offer you both, right now and into the future. (Pour some of the water slowly over the stones, then ask the partners to pour the rest of it together. The stones and rings do not have to be completely submerged, just wet.) May you feel the love and care of our community surrounding you and holding you in this moment and in the days to come. (Remove the stones one by one, dry them off, and put them in the small bag. Give the bag of stones to the partners. If the partners put their rings in the bowl, dry them off and return them. The partners may then put them on each other’s fingers as they did during their marriage or commitment ceremony. You might play, or have people sing or hum, an appropriate piece of music during these actions.) Closing Words I would like to close with a poem by the poet David Whyte. Much Has Been Said Much has been said about the eternal and untouchable nature of love, its tidal ungovernable forces and its emergence from far beyond the ordinary, but love may find its fullest, most imagined and most courageous form when it leaves the abstractions and safety of the timeless and the untrammeled to make its promises amidst the fears, vulnerabilities, and disappearances of our difficult, touchable and time bound world. To love and to witness love in the face of possible loss and to find the mystery of love’s promise in the shadow of that loss, in the shadow of the ordinary and in the shadow of our own inevitable disappearance may be where the eternal source of all our origins stands in awe of the full consequences of everything it has set in motion. Chalice Extinguishing [Name 1] and [Name 2], you have loved each other well. You have experienced love, as the poet says, in “its fullest, most imagined and most courageous form / when it leaves the abstractions / and safety of the timeless … to make its promises / amidst the fears, vulnerabilities, / and disappearances of our difficult, touchable and time bound world.” Your partnership has witnessed love in many forms. And now that love is expanding to include an anticipated loss. But even in the shadow of that loss, you have chosen to continue to share your lives fully with each other, and with so many others, including these dear friends right here. And that is nothing short of miraculous. As we extinguish the chalice, know that the light of love remains burning brightly in your lives. (Extinguish the chalice.) Go now, with that love in your hearts, surrounded by peace. Amen. May it be so. (After the ritual has ended, pour the water from the bowl back into the bottle and give it to the partners.)