For a Loved One with Dementia or Cognitive Decline Rev. McKinley L. Sims This is a blessing for a person living with dementia or cognitive decline. It could be done with just a leader and the focus person, or with a small circle of loved ones. Adapt and personalize it to suit the focus person’s preferences in music, textures, smells, and so on, how they like to be touched or not touched, and their ability to understand what is happening. Materials □ Chalice or candle □ Sensory object, such as a cut flower or piece of soft cloth □ Perfume, incense, essential oil, or something else aromatic □ Small bowl or cup of water □ Music Setup Put a chalice or candle in the space and have materials readily accessible. Include something to play the music with, such as a record player or speaker. Script (If the focus person may not recognize you or fully track what is happening, always explain what you are about to do. It’s usually best to ask permission before touching them.) Chalice Lighting [Name], we’re here to love you with a blessing today. Are you okay if I do that? I’d be holding your hand, blessing you with this [flower, cloth, or other sensory object], and then we are going to sing a song I think you know. Is that okay with you? Okay, let’s breathe together for a few moments. Take a nice easy breath in … and out. In … and out. (You can hold the focus person’s hand, or place your hand on their arm or shoulder. If possible, make eye contact or have both of you close your eyes.) [Name], you are loved and worthy of love. Your body, mind, and soul are holy, even when they don’t feel entirely whole. May your time be filled with sacred moments of rest, laughter, connection, music, and love. (Light the chalice or candle.) We light this chalice for you, [Name]. Your light burns bright like this flame, and we are warmed by your spirit and your memories. Your memories are sacred, and we will cherish them and hold as many of them for you as we can. (If you like, dip the sensory object in water or dab it with something that smells good. Touch it to the focus person’s hands.) [Name], we bless your body, your tool for building bridges and making memories with family and friends. It is a tool that can be used for healing or harm, and we are so grateful for the healing your body has helped to create. The world has been changed for the better by your presence in it. We are grateful together. (Touch the sensory object to their head.) [Name], we bless your mind, your fragile and wonderful brain and its neural pathways that hold all the images and sounds and wonder of a life lived in full complexity. Although our brains can hold so much, they can also hide so much from us over time. We are so grateful for your mind that has thought and pondered, reasoned and rationalized, guided your way and helped you to recognize our faces with love and care. We grieve your mind’s changing, and yet life is change. We change together. (Touch the sensory object to their heart.) [Name], we bless your heart, your center of gravity and anchor in this world. For your fierce love and spirit, for your care for and commitment to us and to [name causes or engagements that were meaningful to the focus person]. As your body changes, and your mind changes, your heart remains constant in connection with our hearts. We are here together, grieving and loving you through your changes, our changes. You, [Name], are loved and worthy of love, no matter how long it takes you to remember a name or a word, no matter how long it takes you to find your way. You love us and we love you. We love together. (Hand the sensory object to the focus person to hold.) [Name], may you be at peace, may you feel safe, may you be surrounded by love. Amen. Blessed be. Song (Choose from the following options or pick one you know the focus person enjoys.) “Comfort Me” (Mimi Bornstein-Doble) “Amazing Grace” “You Are My Sunshine” Chalice Extinguishing Come, Spirit of Life, Be in this space that holds so much love and sorrow and change. May this space be a continued blessing for [Name], and may love resound through the halls often and fully. As the Love that never lets go and never lets us down reminds us: “Love is patient, love is kind, it is not jealous; love does not brag, it is not arrogant. It does not act disgracefully, it does not seek its own benefit; it is not provoked, does not keep an account of a wrong suffered, it does not rejoice in unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth; it keeps every confidence, it believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never fails.” (1 Corinthians 13:4–8) Our bodies and minds may fail, but we are grateful love does not. We are grateful for you, [Name]. You are loved for all time. Amen. (Extinguish the chalice or candle.)