For the First Anniversary of a Natural Disaster Rev. Nathan Ryan This ritual is for marking the one-year anniversary of a major weather event or other natural disaster. It is designed as a congregational worship service, but could be adapted for other contexts; in all cases it must be tailored to your specific community and the culture it is immersed in. The outline version given here is based on a service done in Louisiana. Materials □ Chalice □ Art to help set the mood □ Music Setup Arrange seats in rows or a circle, with the chalice visible at the front or center. Use art to set the mood as people enter and find places. For instance, when the author of this ritual did it as an evening service, he projected a ninety-minute video of the sun setting over the Mississippi River, synced with the actual sunset. The service is meant to retell the story of the disaster and what people experienced in it. Be careful not to push too hard on the bruise. People are very vulnerable on an anniversary. Lightly guide them through the retelling. People cope with tragedy by crafting a narrative, and the goal of this service is to do this. Identify three leaders in the church to speak at this service: one who had direct experience of the disaster, one who was a part of the recovery, and one who can speak to what the church did. You may want to choose readers as well, or do the readings yourself. Look for music that speaks to the people who will be participating, and try to choose readings that do not directly discuss the event. You want words, music, and images that will reflect the shadow it cast, rather than relishing its details. If you are doing the ritual in a church context, look at orders of service from the weeks immediately after the disaster and consider reusing those readings and songs. Script Opening Words Come into this place. Come into this place that is still safe. Come into this place as broken as you are right now. Bring in the truth that you are still enough. Bring in the truth that you are still safe here. Don’t leave your fears and worries at the door. Tell them they can sit next to you, but they should be quiet for this hour. Come into this space that is still here for you—all of you. Come, let us be together, a still broken together people. Song “Come and Go with Me” (African American spiritual) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Lighting As we light our flame, Let us remember the world that was And envision the world that we hope will be. Let this flame illuminate both past and future Right here in the present. (Light the chalice.) Introduction to the Anniversary (Tell participants what they will experience today. Give them permission to quietly leave the room at any point if they need to. Tell them a little about how the disaster is still affecting you, but be careful not to center your own pain or struggles. This service isn’t about content or exposition. It is a time for people to gather together and make space for God’s work, to create an emptiness the people will fill.) Song (Choose a song that sets the tone for the storytelling; lead participants in singing it.) Reading (Choose a text that sets the tone for the first part of the story.) Speaker 1 (The first speaker describes their firsthand experience of the event.) Song “There Is More Love Somewhere” (African American spiritual) (Lead participants in singing.) Reading (Choose a text recounting some aspect of the recovery.) Speaker 2 (The second speaker describes their experience helping with the recovery.) Song (Choose a song that speaks to the recovery and lead participants in singing.) Prayer The God that we know when we remember, The God that we know when we are held in community, The God that we know when we see the world made better amidst tragedy, Be with us on this day. Bless all of those wounded, healing hearts. Bless all of us who are not yet at peace with what happened. Bless all those who will never be at peace with it. Bless all of us who are ready to move on, And bless those of us who are ready to move on, but feel stuck or are still coping. Help us heal. Help all of us heal. Please know we will never forget. Please turn us into a people bound by love, committed to justice, and yearning for a more compassionate world. Amen. Reading (Choose a text that describes how the larger community responded to the disaster.) Speaker 3 (The third speaker discusses the role of the church in the recovery.) Song “I Know I Can” (Dennis Hamilton) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing The year has passed. Most of us are still here together. We are forever changed. Let us try to love this new world as we mourn for what we’ve lost. Tell your story. Watch out for the echoes. Go love the world. Go love yourselves. Make peace. Be kind. Amen. (Extinguish the chalice.)