For Blessing the Organizers Ruth Idakula and Rev. Deanna Vandiver This is a ritual to bless movement organizers and all those working for social justice and collective liberation. The authors co-created the original version of this ritual in 2016 as a resource for the movement, a way to strengthen people for the journey toward collective liberation, and have been adapting it ever since. Materials None Setup Anywhere—in a church sanctuary, online, on the street, in the forest; this is a portable ritual. This ritual may be adapted to serve whoever needs blessing in your community. Script Beloveds, thank you for showing up for each other, for the beloved community that we are always in the process of creating. We bear witness to the courage and the power among us. In this sacred time, we ask everyone present to join in a ritual of blessing for all of us who organize for justice and collective liberation. Beloveds, you are invited to take a centering breath in and then, with intention, release it. As you breathe in and breathe out, know that you are not alone Know that the ancestors that fought before you are with you now Know that you are forever guided by their wisdom And sustained by their love and courage As you are willing and able, reach out and connect with a human being near you, with a hand, an elbow, a wave, a gentle smile … some acknowledgment of our connection. (Pause as participants get connected.) You are invited to be a part of this blessing, offering your love and energy and support. You are invited to be a part of this blessing, receiving love and energy and support from those around you. Breathing in and then slowly releasing your breath, please repeat after me. (Read the following eight lines, pausing after each to let participants repeat what you have said.) I am worthy. We are worthy. My life matters. Our lives matter. I am not alone. We are not alone. I am held by a community of power and love. We are held by a community of power and love. Now, breathing in and then slowly releasing your breath, please repeat after me, offering this blessing to each other. (Read the following two lines, pausing after each to let participants repeat what you have said.) We are grateful for you. We need you. Receive this blessing, and go forth with courage and compassion to organize for justice and mercy. Breathing in a breath of love, breathing out a breath of liberation, we say asé and amen. (Close with a song or chant relevant to the group you are blessing.)