For Survivors of Sexual Assault and Harassment Rev. Kate Lore This ritual is based on the premise that sharing our stories of sexual assault and harassment is both healing and empowering. It was designed for groups of up to fifty people but can be adapted as needed. It was created as a stand-alone healing ritual during the #MeToo movement for a congregation of 450 members. Members of the congregation’s pastoral care team and representatives of a local organization working against domestic and sexual violence were present to offer additional support. A slightly modified version of this ritual was adapted for nonmembers of the congregation who were also seeking healing. Materials For the main ritual space: □ Large altar table □ Chalice □ Tea lights, at least one for each participant □ White craft sand □ Large tray for holding sand and candles □ Copies of the responsive reading For the entrance: □ Large bulletin board covered in white butcher paper □ Large, fat-tipped markers For outside: □ Fire pit □ Firewood Setup This ritual is designed to be led by four leaders, but can be modified to work with fewer, if necessary. Leader 1 should ideally have some formal training in pastoral care. Recruit a handful of helpers—ideally, members of a lay pastoral care team or others in a formal role of community care. They will: • Welcome participants and hand them a tea light. • Introduce participants to the “bathroom wall” and encourage them to write something on it as they enter. • Help usher people out to the fire pit and guide them through the ritual, offering emotional support as needed. Darkness is essential for this ritual, as it affords more intimacy and safety when dealing with strong emotions. In the main ritual space: • Dim the lights and/or light candles all around the room. • Set chairs in concentric circles, with the altar table in the center. • Place the tea lights on the altar table. • Set copies of the responsive reading on the chairs or distribute them in some other way. • Recruit a few people to offer examples of assault or harassment, in case no one is spontaneously moved to speak. At the entrance: • Set out the paper-covered bulletin board and markers. • At the top of the board, write “Bathroom Wall” in large letters, and under it write “(for expressing our innermost feelings about the people who harmed us.)” • Write a few examples in advance, in an informal graffiti style, to give participants a feel for it (e.g., “I was raped at church camp and am furious over this betrayal,” or “I never gave consent; it was rape!”). Outside: • Set up the fire pit and light a fire so that it will be appropriately roaring for the burning portion of the ritual. • Designate a helper to tend the fire during the ritual. • Recruit musicians to play drums or musical instruments. Have a helper on hand with a tray to receive and transport the tea lights of anyone who requests their assistance. Script (Comforting music—preferably live—should be playing as people enter.) Opening Words L EADER 1: Welcome, everyone, to this very special healing ritual. Here we will both speak and hear stories of our experiences with sexual violence and harassment. As many of you can attest, doing so is powerful. Not only does it demonstrate the gravity of the problem, it assures us that we’re not alone; it gives us hope that the power of our joined voices can change norms and develop systems of accountability. That said, I want to acknowledge that it may not be easy being here. We may be afraid of our scars. Deep emotions may rise to the surface. We may worry that we’ll embarrass ourselves by crying or raging in public. We may even worry that our private pain might be shared with others outside of this room. So let me begin by stressing the importance of creating a space in which people’s privacy is respected. I ask that everyone here pledge to keep any specifics shared in this room confidential. Our stories are our own to tell. Nobody else has the right to share our stories without our permission. So if you are willing to maintain the confidentiality of the people in this room, please say, “I will.” P ARTICIPANTS: I will. L EADER 1: I also ask that you focus upon listening and being present to others when they speak. Please refrain from interrupting them or offering unsolicited advice. So, welcome, brave ones. We’re so glad you’re here this evening, and we honor and salute you! Chalice Lighting L EADER 1: We light a chalice this evening as a way of marking our entrance into sacred time and space. Here in this sanctuary of ancient dreams, wisdom, and beauty, we gather now to grow, to speak our truths, to connect deeply with other, to heal and be renewed. (Light the chalice.) Responsive Reading L EADER 1: Please join us in a responsive reading. L EADER 1: To all of us who have been retraumatized by the public conversation on sexual assault and harassment. L EADER 2: To our courage, to our silence, to our endurance, to our carrying of private shame we never should have had to carry; to our disappointment and betrayal when the perpetrator was someone loved, respected, or trusted, to our needing to remain quiet, to our sobbing in the night, to waking up numb, to our rage, to our loss, to our loneliness. L EADER 3: To our witnessing victim blaming, to having to read asinine comments from broken, clueless people; to far too many people trying to put us back in the corner again, trying to silence our voices. L EADER 4: To a stunning lack of compassion in the face of life-altering, body-altering events. And also to all those who have showered us with compassion, with hopes for our healing. To all of this. P ARTICIPANTS: To victims, to survivors: We believe you. We are with you. We are you. L EADER 1: We honor and salute the sheer strength it takes to survive abuse of any kind. We salute everyone here for surviving. We honor everyone here for carrying grief, pain, and isolation in the face of unspeakable things. P ARTICIPANTS: We are not alone. And we are not to blame. L EADER 2: We will not be put back in a corner. We will not shut up. L EADER 3: We will not be blamed. We will not celebrate pedophiles and rapists and those who commit assault. P ARTICIPANTS: We will never be silenced again. L EADER 4: Tonight we extend our love, respect, and healing energy to everyone here who has endured unspeakable things. L EADER 1: We give you our total commitment to exposing and ending cycles of violence, predation, and harm. P ARTICIPANTS: One by one, we are breaking the silence. One by one, we are healing. One by one, we are changing our world and each other. L EADER 1: Let us name the sacred nature of the work upon which we now embark. It is the work of generations. Tonight, we hold our ancestors and empower each other to stop the abuse. A LL: This is our work in our time. Let us do it together! Song “Spirit of Life” (Carolyn McDade) L EADER 1: And now we call upon the Spirit of Life to infuse our healing work tonight. Let us join voices in singing “Spirit of Life.” (Lead participants in singing.) Roll Call L EADER 1: For anyone here who feels that their story is somehow less important than others’, who feels they have “gotten off easy” compared to others, that their experiences aren’t shocking enough or awful enough to be shared—rest assured. We need your voice, too. Because all accounts of harassment and abuse are valid. None of them should be swept under the carpet. And while none of us should ever feel pressured to talk about the abuse we’ve experienced, it’s important to note that there’s a healing power in sharing our stories. We won’t have the time to hear all our stories tonight. What I’d like to do instead is conduct a roll call. I’m about to begin listing types of assault and harassment. If I name something that you’ve experienced, we invite you to raise your hand while saying “Me, too!” with gusto, as you are willing and able. • Some of us have had to endure suggestive and unwanted comments—from bosses, coworkers, and people we don’t even know. • Some of us were sexually assaulted by strangers who robbed us of our innocence, our dignity, our sense of safety, our peace of mind. • Some of us were sexually assaulted by people we knew and had trusted. • Some of us were violated by family members or their friends. • Some of us were sexualized by others before we ever reached puberty. • Some of us feel like no matter how old we get, we’ll never reach an age where we won’t be sexualized. • Some of us have had to endure unwanted sexual advances from people who had more power than us—in schools and other learning institutions, or in our workplaces, or in our congregations, or in our homes. • Some of us have endured sexual assault or harassment without saying no, because we were too afraid for our safety or survival or because we simply froze up. • Some of us said no, and it happened anyway. • Some of us have suffered the humiliation of being groped. • Some of us have been raped. • Some of us have been humiliated by lewd comments made in the presence of others. • Some of us have had to endure lewd comments in small, confined places where we felt trapped. I got us started; now it’s your turn. If you feel so moved, please share a type of incident that either happened to you or a loved one. Please be as brief in your descriptions as I have been. We’re not looking for a lot of detail during this ritual; we just want to name aloud the types of experiences we’ve had to endure. And, like before, shout out “Me, too!” if you have had a similar experience. (Don’t be afraid of silence; give participants time to gather themselves and choose to speak. Still, if a silence lingers, discreetly signal your helpers to “seed” some examples. Let people name things until you feel the group has reached a natural conclusion point.) L EADER 1: Thank you so much for sharing parts of our collective stories. Thank you for being silence-breakers, truth-tellers, and change-makers. Together we join our voices with people around the globe who are not only saying “Me, too!” but have decided that these abuses will no longer be tolerated. Let us all feel the power of saying this rallying cry. After I count to three, let us join voices in saying “No more!” One, two, three— P ARTICIPANTS: No more! Burning Ritual L EADER 2: As you were arriving, our greeters introduced you to our bathroom wall—a shared repository of our innermost feelings. I hope you had some time to write down yours. If you didn’t, you are about to have another chance. What we’re going to do now is file out into the entrance and read the remarks on the bathroom wall. If you want to add anything, this will be your chance. After a few minutes, we will then snatch off pieces of the butcher paper and burn them outside in the fire. The purpose of this ritual is to release the hold our injuries have on us; let go of any lingering sense of shame, guilt, regret, or self-doubt; and experience the power of people releasing their abuses together! We will then file back into the sanctuary. I ask that you remain completely silent for this part of our ritual. Our helpers will guide you through the process. (When people go outside, the fire helper and musicians should be already stationed in a circle, drumming or playing music around a roaring fire. In their own time, participants will cast their pieces of paper into the fire. Make time to let them watch the embers float upward. When the time feels right, cue the musicians to fade into silence. Guide the participants back inside.) Lighting of Tea Lights (Once everyone has settled into their seats, continue.) L EADER 3: We give thanks for the healing power of this community to release us from our silence and pain. Our work, though, is not yet complete. There are people outside of this space who have helped bring us to this point in time. And so we will now honor them. In a moment we’ll invite you, if you wish, to come up to the altar and light a candle for someone who has inspired you or helped you in any way on your journey toward healing. You can say their name aloud if you want, or articulate your hopes and wishes. We’re going to take our time with this, so please don’t feel rushed. (Soft music begins. Participants come up one by one and light candles.) L EADER 4: Thank you, everyone, for bearing witness to your own and each other’s resilience and dreams for a better way. We’re now going to sing a song that was written by Libby Roderick. She originally wrote it to comfort her sister, who had just been sexually assaulted. We sing it tonight to remind ourselves that we will not be defined or defiled by the ugly things that have been done to us. Let us rise in body or spirit and form one big circle as we sing “How Could Anyone.” Song “How Could Anyone” (Libby Roderick) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing L EADER 1: Spirit of Life, we give thanks for the people in this room and for this time set aside for healing. Tonight we have come together to break the silence, to tell the truth, and to help each other heal. And what we’ve firmly established here tonight is that silence does break, truth does seek the light, and healing is possible. Our secrets are beginning to breathe fresh air again and noticing they’re not alone. In the comfort of this community, we have discovered that our power with one another is far greater than the power someone once had over us. Spirit of Life, please help us remember this night, our power, our connections, and your steady presence in our lives. Amen. (Extinguish the chalice.) (Close with an invitation to a processing space if one is available, and share information about where people can get further support if they want it.)