For Acknowledging Mother’s, Father’s, and Parents’ Days Rev. Lynn Gardner and Rev. Wendy Bartel Inspired by our families and our first co-ministry with the Sierra Foothills Unitarian Universalists Many people have mixed feelings about Mother’s Day, Father’s Day, or Parents’ Day. This ritual acknowledges a variety of relationships between parents and children: the beautiful, the challenging, and the complicated. Many familial experiences are hidden from those outside the family and not acknowledged. This ritual was designed to be used as part of a congregation’s worship service, to name prayerfully and out loud the deeper complexity and pain that many of us carry. In their family and professional experiences in childcare, music therapy, and co-ministry, the authors have faced and witnessed the amazing, difficult, awful, incredible, and perplexing experiences people have had with their parents and as parents. They want Unitarian Universalism to continue to expand nuance and inclusion. Materials □ Altar table □ Thirteen candles and holders (or twelve, for a Parents’ Day ritual), as alike as possible □ Small taper candle □ Small plate Setup Arrange the candles on the altar table so they are visible to those who will gather, and so that a person lighting them won’t block the view of them; set a taper beside them to transfer the flame with. If the candles are not near a lit chalice, place a small lit tea light near them, with the taper. Recruit a helper to light the candles. Script (Say “Mother,” “Father,” or “Parent” as appropriate throughout, according to the day you are marking.) We want our congregations to be places where each of us can be more fully welcomed and known. When we look at the array of cards available for [Mother’s, Father’s, Parents’] Day, we notice that there are many relationships and experiences that aren’t named … that are invisible. This includes the gender identities of parents who identify beyond the binary. We invite us all to broaden the terms of [mothering, fathering, parenting] to expand past society’s gendered definitions of these words and to more intentionally include people of many fabulous genders. We begin this ritual by acknowledging and honoring the complexity of this day, the complicated relationships and experiences that may be present here in this gathering, and by lighting candles. (The helper lights the taper from the tea light or an already lit chalice. After you read each line below, the helper lights one of the candles on the altar table. Go at a calm, thoughtful pace, allowing each line and each candle to have its own significance.) For those who wish their relationship with their [mother, father, parent] was different than it is. For those whose [mothers, fathers, parents] have died. For the [mothers, fathers, parents] who foster, for those who have adopted, and for the birth [mothers, fathers, parents]. For all those who want to be [mothers, fathers, parents], and who may not have this experience. For those [mothers, fathers, parents] whose children are far away. For the [mothers-in-law, fathers-in-law, parents-in-law], [stepmothers, stepfathers, stepparents], and coparents who are redefining family. For those who didn’t receive the [mothering, fathering, parenting] that they needed. For those who didn’t offer the [mothering, fathering, parenting] they wish they had. For those [mothers, fathers, parents] who have lost children, whether not born, infants, children, youth, or adults; for the ones who are missed. (Choose from the next three options as appropriate.) For those families that don’t include a mom, yet are mothering, who are loving and whole just as they are. For those families that don’t include a dad, yet are fathering, who are loving and whole just as they are. For those families who have parents whose gender identity is expressed beyond “mother” or “father,” who are loving and whole just as they are. For the [mothering, fathering, parenting] of the furry, the finned, the spiny, the scaled, the winged. For those with wonderful and complicated relationships with their [mother, father, parent], or with their children, all practicing the art of being human. For those who are grateful for the blessings of their [mothers, fathers, parents]. (All the candles should now be lit.) Call to mind, now, those who have been a [mother/father/parent] or [mother/father/parent] figure to you. (pause) You are invited to speak those names aloud. (Pause for speaking of names and then another breath.) Blessed be these names. Blessed be our memories. Blessed be this moment. (Pause here, staying focused on the candles and allowing space for feelings to emerge and be expressed, before ending the ritual or moving on to the next element in a worship service. You might transition with a brief musical interlude, if appropriate to your setting.)