For an Assistive Device Rev. Bran Lennox This ritual honors the use of a mobility device, assistive device, medical aid, or similar ability companion: a cane, wheelchair, scooter, rollator, splint, limb brace, prosthetic, hearing aid, cochlear implant, pair of glasses, screen reader, mobile AAC system, adaptive utensil, insulin pen or pump, or anything else. It is designed as a stand-alone ritual, but could be adapted for use in a congregational worship service. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Long spool of thin ribbon (or a ball of yarn for larger groups) □ Scissors □ Optional: Music Setup Review the ritual with the focus person beforehand. Find out what terminology they want you to use and how you should describe the function or purpose of the device. They may not want you to say anything. Ask whether it’s okay for you to touch the device. The ritual includes an opportunity for the focus person to share a reflection if they wish to. Give them ample time and support to prepare it. It should ideally be no more than five minutes long. They may wish to describe their own journey or they may wish to speak more generally, on a topic like disability justice or the theology of embodiment. They could offer the reflection themselves or have it read by someone else if they prefer. Recruit a helper ahead of time to assist with passing the ribbon. This ritual contains some community education, which may be beneficial in a congregational worship service. If it is used in a worship service, separate the ritual elements and intersperse them throughout the service—using the chalice lighting at the opening, the songs for hymns, the prayer for the pastoral prayer, etc.—rather than retaining the ritual as a single unit. Script Chalice Lighting We light this flame, Embraced within a chalice. This light casts a circle of warmth Which longs to hold us all in our entirety And grows ever wider, Shimmering with unending possibility. Song “Glorious” (MaMuse) (Lead participants in singing. You could substitute another uplifting song, prerecorded or live, that resonates for the focus person.) Opening Words It is said that the use of tools is part of what makes us human. Certainly as a species we demonstrate a drive to develop ever more intricate technologies, and when we are at our best, we devote our energy to creating tools which help people be the selves they wish to be. Assistive devices are a symbol of the beauty of both human ingenuity and human compassion. This is a sacred moment. One among us has come to a time in their life when it is easier for them to access parts of the world with an assistive device. It is a sacred moment, and it can also be a vulnerable one. Many people have misconceptions about such devices and the people who use them, and from those misconceptions can arise misinformed actions. A person with an assistive device may be subjected to stares that exhaust, comments that wound, and even touch that dehumanizes. It takes courage to claim space as a disabled person in an ableist world. The support of our chosen community, the people nearest and dearest to our lives, can affirm and sustain us in times when living authentically is painful and challenging. Our community can affirm that, yes, we deserve to be in as little pain as possible. Yes, we deserve to exist in public spaces. Yes, we deserve to live and to thrive to the maximum extent achievable. And yes, it can feel glorious when we embrace a new tool that makes such thriving possible. And so we gather today, to affirm [Name] and their use of this [device]. [Name] wants to share some information about this with us. [Describe the device and its purpose however the focus person wishes you to, or say something like “Though they are happy to celebrate their use of [device] today, they ask that everyone respect their privacy regarding their reasons for using it.”] Reflection I’d like to invite [Name] to share more about their journey in their own words. (If the focus person wants to offer a reflection, they may do so here, or have a helper deliver it for them.) Blessing This [device] is now a part of what connects [Name] with this community. We accept it wholeheartedly as a tool of that connection, and commit ourselves to respect and honor its place in [Name]’s life. For however long this item continues to be of help, whether just today or every day of [Name]’s life, we offer our blessing. (Tie one end of the ribbon loosely around your wrist, and then hold up the spool of ribbon for all to see.) I’m going to pass this ribbon around the room now. When it reaches you, please wrap it gently once or twice around your wrist, and then pass it to the next person. Take your time with this, and allow yourself to put intention into this symbol of our connection. [Helper] is available to help as necessary. (Begin to pass the ribbon around the room. If there are more than a few people present, some instrumental background music will help create an appropriate mood.) (When everyone else is connected by the ribbon, pass the spool to the focus person, who will also wrap their wrist. If you have permission to do so, tie the remaining ribbon to the assistive device, and cover the knot with your hands in a moment of silence before continuing. If the focus person does not want you to touch the device, they can tie the ribbon themselves, or just lay it over or hold it against the device if tying a knot would be difficult.) While we are all still connected by this ribbon, let’s engage our hearts and feel the power of what it means to be whole in our togetherness. Please repeat after me. (Read the following text line by line, pausing after each to let participants repeat what you have said.) [Name], we love you for all that you are. We commit ourselves to honoring your wholeness. We pledge to respect your agency and your privacy. We will broaden the paths of accessibility for you and for all. We embrace all the struggles and joys of embodiment. May this [device] be part of your story of thriving. (Cut the ribbon so that it remains adorning the device. Be careful not to touch the device if you do not have permission to.) May you carry this with you however you choose, as a symbol of our commitment to you. As we now unwind our wrists, let’s sing together. (The helper collects the ribbon during the song.) Song “From You I Receive” (Joseph Segal and Nathan Segal) Prayer Spirit that weaves divinity through all mundane things, Give us the strength to overcome our attraction to binaries and dualisms. When we relegate experiences to the realm of the body or the mind, Whisper to us with your inescapable gentleness That we are fully body and fully spirit. When we wonder if we are healed or wounded, Sigh to us with the patience of a presence beyond time That we are all broken and infinitely whole. When we imagine that there is a perfect way to be embodied, When we suspect that we or someone else could take a better form, When we are tempted to define anyone’s body as an inconvenience, Shake us with the truth: That everything we are is moving and flowing within every living cell, That to know the soul is to know the shape, And to embrace this is liberation. Spirit, reveal to us the self of the self of the self, And the ever-unfolding realness of each companion around us, And hold us in our sacredness of entirety. Amen. Song “There’s a River Flowin’ in My Soul” (Faya Ora Rose Touré) Chalice Extinguishing As we extinguish our chalice, let’s go forth in our human wholeness and celebrate all the blessings we have shared today. (Extinguish the chalice.)