For Everyday Adventures Barbara Seidl The purpose of this ritual is to acknowledge when someone is facing a challenge and to provide a physical reminder that they are not alone. It is appropriate both one to one and in a small or large group, and for most challenges: a math test, surgery, a trip. It can also serve as a general reminder to a congregation that their community is with them in their struggles; it can have one focus person or many. It is not appropriate for children under age 8, because of the sharpness of the safety pin. The author first received this ritual from her college debate coach, the late Tracey Anderson Wayson. Materials □ Safety pins, one for each focus person □ Optional: Basket to hold pins Setup If you are doing this ritual with one other person, no setup is necessary. You’ll just need a safety pin and a somewhat private moment. If one person is offering the ritual to a group (such as a minister to a congregation), safety pins can be distributed during a worship service, or people can be given pins as they arrive. Assume that some people will not get them or will misplace them, though, and be prepared to distribute more as needed, or set baskets of them where people can easily reach them during the service. If a group is offering the ritual to one person (such as a family to a child), everyone should be present in the room at the same time and, ideally, for the duration of the ritual. The person leading the ritual stands next to the person receiving the safety pin. It’s helpful to designate someone to ensure the pin comes back to the leader after it has been passed from hand to hand. See variations for groups of more than seven or eight people. In all cases, the safety pin can be offered for the recipient to pin on themselves. Script ONE TO ONE I have something I’d like to give you. (Show the focus person a safety pin, or instruct them to select one from a basket.) You are about to [take a big math test, go see your doctor, etc.]. I want you to have this safety pin for two reasons. Reason 1: it’s always good to have a safety pin on important or challenging adventures. They come in handy. Reason 2: I want you to have this safety pin as a physical reminder—something you can touch and hold if things get hard on your adventure—a reminder that you’re not holding it together all on your own. I am here thinking of you and helping you hold it all together. There are forces as strong as metal supporting you, and even the smallest and most ordinary things—a breath, a smile, a moment, a safety pin—can be very powerful. Where would you like this pinned to help you remember these things? (The focus person chooses where it should be pinned, though you may offer suggestions. Many people choose to have it pinned over their hearts. Pin it on the spot they have chosen.) As you [take this test, see your doctor, etc.], may you remember that you carry me with you on your adventure, and you don’t have to hold it all together alone. ONE PERSON TO GROUP I believe you all picked up a safety pin when you came in today. If not, please raise your hand and the helpers will bring one to you. Whatever challenges or adventures you may be facing in your lives—[name potential adventures]—I’m giving you this safety pin today for two reasons. Reason 1: it’s always good to have a safety pin on important or challenging adventures. They come in handy. Before I explain reason 2, I invite you to turn to your neighbor, hand them the safety pin, and say “This is for you. I thought you might need it on your next adventure.” Let’s try that now—turn to your neighbor and say, “This is for you. I thought you might need it on your next adventure.” (Participants exchange safety pins. When they have finished, continue.) Reason 2: I want you to have this safety pin as a physical reminder—something you can touch and hold if things get hard on your adventure—a reminder that you’re not holding it together all on your own. We are here thinking of you and helping you hold it all together. There are forces as strong as metal supporting you, and even the smallest and most ordinary things—a breath, a smile, a moment, a safety pin—can be very powerful. Where would you like this pinned to help you remember these things? I invite you now to pin this safety pin on your shirt, the zipper to your jacket, or wherever you have chosen, and to help each other as you’re willing and able. (Continue speaking as people attach the pins.) As you [repeat the adventures named previously], may you remember that you carry us with you on your adventure, and you don’t have to hold it all together alone. SMALL GROUP TO ONE PERSON We have something we’d like to give you. (Show the focus person a safety pin, or instruct them to select one from a basket.) [Name] is about to [take a big math test, go to the doctor, etc.]. We’re going to pass this safety pin around to each person in the room. When it reaches you, please hold it and silently offer your good wishes to [Name] on [this test, this appointment, etc.]. (Continue speaking while the safety pin is passed among participants.) [Name], you are about to [take a big math test, go see your doctor, etc.]. We want you to have this safety pin for two reasons. Reason 1: it’s always good to have a safety pin on important or challenging adventures. They come in handy. Reason 2: We want you to have this safety pin as a physical reminder—something you can touch and hold if things get hard on your adventure—a reminder that you’re not holding it together all on your own. We are here thinking of you and helping you hold it all together. There are forces as strong as metal supporting you, and even the smallest and most ordinary things—a breath, a smile, a moment, a safety pin—can be very powerful. (Retrieve the pin from the last person to hold it.) Where would you like this pinned to help you remember these things? (The focus person chooses where it should be pinned, though you may offer suggestions. Many people chose to have it pinned over their hearts. Pin the safety pin in the designated spot on the focus person.) As you [take a big math test, go see your doctor, etc.], may you remember that you carry us with you on your adventure, and you don’t have to hold it all together alone. LARGE GROUP TO ONE PERSON (If the safety pin is unlikely to make it around the room in the allotted time, such as because the group is larger than seven or eight people, consider options below.) Option 1: Attach a note to the safety pin (Attach a note to the pin saying, “We’ll be using this safety pin for a blessing later today. [Name] is [having surgery on Monday, taking a big test, etc.]. When this safety pin reaches you, please hold it, silently offer any good wishes you have for [Name], and pass it along to the next person.” Attach a long ribbon to the pin and note to make them easy to hold, pass, and track. Begin passing them early in the event, well before the ritual, and designate someone to track them, keep them moving, and bring them to you when needed. You may want to provide yourself with an identical backup pin in case the one being passed gets lost.) (Insert this line in the script.) This safety pin has been passed hand to hand among us and now holds all our hopes and good wishes for you. Where would you like this pinned, to keep us with you on your adventure? Option 2: Don’t pass the safety pin (Insert this line in the script.) Friends, please take a moment to summon your good wishes for [Name] silently into your hearts and minds. And now send them into this small but powerful reminder of our love. (Hold the safety pin up in the palm of your hand, angling your hand down slightly so the pin is visible to others. Wait 5–10 seconds.) Where would you like this pinned to keep us with you on your adventure?