For Coming Out Rev. Kimberly Wildszewski This ritual is designed to recognize, affirm, and celebrate any person who is coming out from a previously assumed sexual orientation or gender identity. It is meant to be used by an individual who is in relationship with a small group, community, or congregation, in the context of a congregational worship service or small group gathering. This ritual was inspired by one the author had written for others who had claimed new or true names, genders, or pronouns, and needed these claims recognized and affirmed. The author is a queer cisgender woman who was raised within Unitarian Universalism. She hopes to give congregations language and ritual to help create and maintain allyship and affirmation. Materials None Setup Review the script with the focus person prior to the ritual to make sure it resonates with their story and their experience. Personalize it as appropriate. Be sure the focus person is comfortable being touched in the laying on of hands, and have participants just hold out open hands if they are not. Script Henri Nowen said that “to give someone a blessing is the most significant affirmation we can offer.” Today, we are here to give [Name] our blessing and our affirmation, as they [say what identity the focus person is naming or claiming in the ritual]. [Name], you have come with stardust in your hair, with the rush of planets in your blood, your heart beating out the seasons of eternity, with a shining in your eyes like the sunlight. As you present yourself here before this congregation, may it be known that we count you among our blessings. You were born into a world filled with boxes, boundaries, closets, and enclosures. Some were bold and loud; others were built up around you without your knowing. And in your own true growing you have had to discover and dismantle each. Piece by piece you tore down assumptions. Piece by piece you pulled away expectations. Piece by piece your spirit mended. Piece by piece you laid a new foundation on which Your true self danced, sang, flourished, wholly, holy, free. Let it be known that this journey of resistance, of discovery, of alignment has been a sacred one. Whatever boundaries you were given that stifled your spirit, Whoever you were waiting on to offer their affirmation, Whatever made you question your place in the world, May you be released from these. However you choose to identify No matter how many times you must say the words And even if they change over time May you be reminded that this journey, Your journey, Is a sacred one. And you are not alone. Beloved village, will you please come forward and, as you’re able, circle round [Name]. Those closest to them, please place a hand somewhere on them or hold out your open palms toward them. Others further out, please place a hand on someone who is connected to them, or hold our your open palms in turn, until everyone in this space is connected. (Pause while people arrange themselves.) [Name], what surrounds you now is neither boundary nor border. What envelops you now is love—is affirmation for who you are. Knowing this, feeling the weight of this truth, receive our blessing: [Name], you were loved before you had words. Before you could tell us who you are. You are loved now, worthy of love now, will be loved as your life, relationships, and identity continue to unfurl. May you know our affirmation and celebration of all the ways in which you experience sacred, intimate, connection—with others, and for yourself. We not only respect you, we honor your [sexuality, gender identity] as a beautiful part of who you are. To give someone a blessing is the most significant affirmation we can offer. I cannot do that alone. All who gather today, will you join me in saying the words of blessing: [Name], we dedicate you in the name of goodness, beauty, and truth. We bless you. We are blessed by your authenticity and your trust. May you remember this moment as a time when you were seen, known, and loved. Amen.