For a Hysterectomy Rev. Jessica Clay This ritual is for anyone who is preparing for a hysterectomy. It is designed for a small, intimate circle of no more than a dozen people. Materials □ Small altar table □ Chalice □ Tea lights, one for each participant and one extra □ Small starter candle □ Small bell or singing bowl □ Music □ Small pieces of colored card stock and pens Setup Review the script with the focus person beforehand to personalize it to their situation. Ask about how they would like you to describe their relationship with their body, including their uterus and ovaries, and (if relevant) their reproductive hopes or history. Some people may need the ritual to center on grief, while others might be celebrating rather than mourning; choose words and songs appropriate to their feelings. Find out if they are comfortable with being touched in a laying on of hands; if not, adapt the ritual by inviting participants instead to rub their palms together and hold their warmed hands up toward the focus person. This ritual is designed to be gender inclusive; if the focus person is not a cisgender woman, it is especially important to ask them how you should speak of their experiences and anatomy. Give participants the ritual prompts ahead of time so they can think about what they would like to share. This ritual includes three songs, all of which are simple enough to be sung without accompaniment. You may want to line up a song leader ahead of time. If the group isn’t comfortable singing, you can either have one person sing or skip the music and instead opt for more silence. This ritual should be held in a quiet, comfortable setting, ideally in someone’s home. Tea and finger food afterward might be nice. Set up chairs in a circle, with the small altar table in the middle. Place the chalice and the bell on the table, and arrange the tea lights around the chalice. Place a pen and one piece of cardstock under each person’s chair. Seat participants with limited mobility next to the focus person so that they can easily join in the laying on of hands. Script Opening Words Welcome to all who have come here today to honor and bless [Name] as they prepare for their hysterectomy. We gather today to honor this loss and bless a new beginning, [Name]’s new relationship with their body. All who gather in this sacred circle are called to hold [Name] in love and care during this time. [Name], we gather to remind you that we are your community, that you are beloved to us, and that you are held in love as you undergo this. We gather to support you, mourn with you, and bless you during this time. Chalice Lighting We light this chalice for [Name]’s body. This body that has held [Name] and now prepares for a transition, a loss, and a new possibility. We light this chalice for all of the feelings that [Name] is feeling. Loss, pain, relief, fear, hope, possibility, and many more. We light this chalice for this community gathered here, Sacred witnesses to this transition. We light this chalice for this moment together. (Light the chalice and then ring the bell.) Moment of Silence (Pause for a brief moment of silence.) Song “I Know This Rose Will Open” (Mary E. Grigolia) (Lead participants in singing.) Naming We gather in this moment to acknowledge the significance of this hysterectomy. (Speak here about the focus person’s experiences, reproductive history, or reasons for the hysterectomy, in accordance with your conversations with them ahead of time. Depending on their circumstances and preferences, you might say something like one or more of the following.) • We name that [Name]’s uterus held life and gave birth to [number] children. We give thanks for this. • We name that [Name]’s uterus held life that ended too soon. We acknowledge the pain and grief of this loss. • Societal messages of what it means to be a woman inform the way we relate to our bodies. Many people feel a complex mix of emotions around hysterectomy, including loss of identity. • [Name] wanted to give birth, but has never had that opportunity. This procedure takes that possibility away. For this we grieve with them. • [Name] had an incredible amount of [pain, disease, complications] leading up to this moment. We acknowledge this suffering and the hopes for its release. [Name] has sometimes felt that their body was betraying them, and we honor this feeling and acknowledge their physical, mental, and emotional pain. • [Name] never wanted a uterus and ovaries; all they have represented is a betrayal by their body. We honor this feeling in this moment and rejoice with them as their body becomes more true to their soul. (If the focus person wants to speak as well, they can do so now. Please let there be silence between things that are said. This is not a ritual to be rushed.) (Ring the bell.) Sharing Blessings With this change we also name the opportunity for new possibilities. We wish for you to reconnect with your body, to be free from pain and disease, and to be open to and curious about what’s next. Our hearts are big enough to hold grief, loss, and hopes for possibilities all at the same time. There are cards and pens under your chairs. Please pick them up and think of your blessings, your hopes for [Name]. What are your wishes for them as they undergo this procedure and move forward in their recovery? What do you want them to remember? What blessings do you want to give them? Please write them on your card now. [Name], you are invited to write on your card your own blessings and hopes for yourself. (Play quiet music in the background as people write. Wait until everyone has finished before continuing.) I invite you to come to the table, read your card, and light a candle. Please give the card to [Name] after you light your candle. After each person speaks we will sing one verse of “Comfort Me” by Mimi Bornstein-Doble. (Alternatively, hold silence for a few moments after each person reads their card. After all participants have read, invite the focus person to read their own card aloud.) Laying On of Hands Please come in and surround [Name] with our love as we sing another round of “Comfort Me.” I invite you all to touch [Name] for this laying on of hands. (Lead the singing as people gather around the focus person. Sing as many verses as feels right.) [Name], you have received the blessings of this community. Hold them in your hands, hold them against your body. Know the care that is wrapped up within each word. Remember these blessings in the days and weeks ahead. Return to them to be reminded of the love and hopes held in this community for you. I light the last tea light now for the unexpected blessings that haven’t been named in this space, but will come to you nonetheless. This is a reminder to be open to the unexpected as you move through this journey. Please be seated. Prayer Spirit of Life and Love, we pray for [Name] on this day. We lift up the [“grief and loss” or “relief and joy”] they are feeling, the path that brought them to this moment. We pray for their body as it prepares to undergo this procedure; we pray for the healing of [Name]’s body and heart with this. We pray for their doctors, nurses, medical staff, all of the people who will be caring for our dear [Name]. May they know theirs is a sacred task. We pray that as [Name] heads into surgery, they may remember the blessings of this community and hold them against their heart. May they feel held in this community after this circle has ended and know that they are beloved. We pray for each member of this circle today; may they remember to check in with [Name] and offer care and support in the days and weeks ahead. Holy One, we ask that you hold [Name] in deep care and remind them that they are not alone, especially in those moments when they are frightened. Remind them of the hope within these blessings, remind them of new possibilities, remind them of the unexpected blessings that will come along just as they need them. For all of these things we pray. Amen. Song “There Is More Love Somewhere” (African American spiritual) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing We extinguish this chalice, but not its light. May [Name] take that light with them in the days and weeks ahead with our blessings. This light lives on in you, you who are so beloved to us. May this light within you provide comfort and remind you of this circle of care which holds you. So may it be. (Extinguish the chalice.)