For Starting at a New School Rev. Allison Palm and Sadie Kahn-Greene This is a family ritual to mark a child’s transition to a new school, but it could also be done at the beginning of a new year at a familiar school. It is designed for preschool and elementary school kids. It could be done the night before or the weekend before school begins, and by a single parent or caregiver and child or with multiple family members present. Materials □ Chalice □ Bag that will go to school (such as a lunch box or backpack) □ Different-colored ribbons (or another special object to be attached to the bag) and scissors □ Optional: Book about starting school or transitioning to a new school Setup Have the bag and ribbons ready. Set up your chalice where you will be doing the ritual. Script Chalice Lighting We are going to take a little time together to think and share about starting at your new school. Let’s start by lighting our chalice, which is a good way to show that this is a special time. (Light the chalice while you, another parent or caregiver, or the child says these words:) We light this chalice together for new beginnings, to celebrate the new beginning of going to a new school. We light this chalice for all of the hopes and wonderings you [or “I”] bring to this new beginning. Story (If you’d like, you can read a book together about starting school or starting at a new school. Here are some suggestions: • The Kissing Hand, by Audrey Penn, illustrated by Ruth E. Harper and Nancy M. Leak, is good for a child first starting school, ages 2–5 • The Invisible String Backpack, by Patrice Karst, illustrated by Joanne Lew-Vriethoff, is good for a child first starting school, ages 3–7 • The Day You Begin, by Jacqueline Woodson, illustrated by Rafael Lopez, is good for a child who has a unique identity in their school, ages 5–8 (After the book, you can spark some conversation using these questions:) • I wonder what you noticed in that story? • I wonder where you see yourself in the story? • I wonder how the story makes you feel? Sharing Wonderings When anyone starts something new, they often have questions or wonderings about what will happen. [Tomorrow, on Monday, etc.], you are starting at a new school. What are you curious about? Do you have any wonderings? We can write them down if you’d like, and we can see what’s on your mind. (The child can share as much as they’d like, writing it down if that feels good. A parent or caregiver can encourage sharing.) Sharing Hopes When anyone starts something new, they often have hopes about what it will be like. What are you hoping you will see or do when you are at your new school? (The child can share as much as they’d like, writing it down if that feels good. A parent or caregiver can encourage sharing.) You have a lot of wonderings and hopes about your new school. That makes sense! (You may want to summarize what they shared.) Ribbons of Courage and Love I wonder what might help you feel ready for this new beginning. Do you need something to help you feel brave? Or to remember that I love you even when you are at school? (Invite responses.) Sometimes different colors and objects can represent ideas and remind us of things. We have all these ribbons today that you can use to help remember some of the things that we just talked about—the things that you want to bring with you as you go to your new school. Let’s pick some out for your [backpack, lunchbox, etc.]. (Pick out ribbons and tie them on to the bag, talking about what they represent.) Chalice Extinguishing I’m glad we could spend some time talking together. Let’s extinguish our chalice by naming all the things that are going to help you be ready for this new school: We extinguish our chalice flame, but carry with us [name what each ribbon represents]. As you carry this bag, may you know that you have everything you need for this new adventure and that you are loved. (Extinguish the chalice and offer a hug, a kiss, or whatever form of affection your child likes best.)