For Blessing a New or Renovated Church Building Rev. Tricia Brennan The completion of a building project marks both the end of a long journey for a congregation and the beginning of a new phase in the congregation’s life as it lives into the new space and the hopes it holds. This ritual is intended for the congregation itself and differs from a more public building dedication. It can be done as part of or after a congregational worship service, or at any other time. This ritual was created for a substantial renovation of a building. It occurs in three locations: a threshold and two spaces within large enough to hold all participants. Adaptions can be made based on the layout of a congregation’s buildings and the new space being blessed. The author is grateful to Louise Marcoux, former director of religious education at the Unitarian Church of Sharon, Mass., with whom she created a number of rituals, including a version of this one. Materials □ Chalice (one that can be carried around) □ Long-stemmed flowers, one for each participant □ Vases, twice as many as needed to hold all the flowers □ Three tables: two large enough to hold the chalice and half of the vases, one large enough for the chalice only □ Copies of the responsive reading and final hymn Setup Outside the threshold to the new space, place a table with the chalice and half of the vases. Put enough long-stemmed flowers for all participants in the vases. Place a table for the chalice in the location of the first stop in the building. Set the third table up in the space where the ritual will end, with the other half of the vases and room for the chalice. If possible, arrange chairs in a circle and put the table in its center. Put copies of the responsive reading and final hymn somewhere easily accessible, such as on the chairs or on another table that participants will pass as they enter. Choose four readers to give different perspectives on the building project. Look for a variety of voices: a youth, an elder, a parent, a choir member, a member of the project committee, a staff person whose work relates to the project’s purpose, a benefactor, someone who can articulate the justice aspect of the build, etc. Adapt the readings to suit their particular standpoints and views. Recruit a helper to carry the chalice. Recruit song leaders to lead the participants in singing “Come and Go with Me” as they walk through the building. You may want to carry a portable sound system or set up amplification at each of the three locations of the ritual. Script (Begin the ritual outside the new or renovated space, at the threshold.) Chalice Lighting (William Schulz) Come into this place of peace And let its silence heal your spirit; Come into this place of memory And let its history warm your soul; Come into this place of prophecy and power And let its vision change its heart. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words Today is a glorious day. An incalculable amount of work went into creating this new space; It truly has been the work of many hands. Take a breath, look at [name of new build] in all its loveliness and with all its hopes for the future, and let yourself feel proud. (Pause to allow participants to look around.) Today our congregation will bless our [name of new build]. We will bless it with our prayers, intentions, and silence. We will bless it with the beauty of flowers and song, and with our presence. It is right that we first acknowledge that before there was a church here on this land, and before we were here, the [name of Indigenous people] lived, worked, played, celebrated, worshipped, and died in this region. We and this faith community, [name], came later. [If your community has a standard land acknowledgment, you could use it here instead.] We stand here at the entrance, the threshold of this new space. Thresholds are places of power and intention, and as part of our blessing today We will bring our highest and deepest intentions to this moment. We will sing “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In,” a perfect hymn for this moment! After each of the first four verses, a member of the congregation will come forward, take a flower from the vase here, and briefly share an intention for this new building. Then they will mindfully cross the threshold. After we all sing the fifth verse, everyone please take a flower and likewise cross the threshold into the [new space], bringing to mind and heart your intention, your hope, your prayer for what we have collectively created. Led by [Name] with our chalice, we will process through the building and gather in [location]. Words and Song (Lead participants in singing verse 1 of “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In.” Then the first speaker comes forward and takes a flower.) S PEAKER 1: Many, many people shared in the adventure of creating this new building, including some who have died. As a young person I am especially grateful, because they worked to create something that they would not live to see, a place that those of my generation will enjoy for many long years. Truly that is a testament of love. Let us remember [names of those who have died]. (The first speaker crosses the threshold into the new space.) (Lead participants in singing verse 2 of “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In.” Then the second speaker comes forward and takes a flower.) S PEAKER 2: We do indeed, all of us, build for the future. We who are older hold such hope for the future of this congregation which has been a meaningful part of our lives, sometimes for decades. I cross this threshold holding this freshly flowering bud, with hope that within these walls a diverse array of humanity will grow closer to one another and to the Spirit that holds us all. (The second speaker crosses the threshold.) (Lead participants in singing verse 3 of “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In.” Then the third speaker comes forward and takes a flower.) S PEAKER 3: I remember well the meeting where we decided to undertake this project. [Name the moment and vision that sparked it.] The power of that collective decision fueled our work through all the time since. May we continue to be a community where all are welcome; may we continue to work for a world where no one is left out. (The third speaker crosses the threshold.) (Lead participants in singing verse 4 of “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In.” Then the fourth speaker comes forward and takes a flower) S PEAKER 4: As beautiful as this new [space] is, more beautiful still is the community of faith that sustains us. I cross this threshold grateful for the commitment to right relations that guided our work, mindful that though we did slip up occasionally we chose to stay in relationship to work things out. May we continue this spiritual practice always. (The fourth speaker crosses the threshold.) (Lead participants in singing verse 5 of “Enter, Rejoice, and Come In.” Then a helper picks up the chalice and leads the participants across the threshold and to the first location. The leader guides each person to take a flower as they pass the table. The leader brings up the rear, taking a flower as well. Once everyone arrives at the first stop, the leader makes their way to the table where the helper has placed the chalice and offers a prayer.) Prayer O Spirit of Love and Life, You who teach us about justice and love, It was many years ago when this congregation awoke to its desire for [name the originating vision]. Today we mark the occasion when that desire has been realized. In joy do we gather and process and sing and pray. For it has been a long and sometimes uncertain road and we are happy to have seen our work through to completion. We pray today that the originating spark that gave rise to our project continues to animate this congregation. For our work is done and our work is not done. Now the [new space] is here and it is beautiful. Now, too, we seek to deepen our commitment to love and justice. We know there are countless ways to do this, some tangible and others less apparent yet still real: the growth of our hearts, our spirits, our consciousness. As we live into our future, help us to wisely use our time, energy, and resources, listening closely to your voice, listening closely to the voices of our children, our neighbors, and the earth, observing the signs of our times. Today is a day for celebration, for appreciation, for joy! And tomorrow calls us forth to new challenges, new visions, new partnerships, new risks, and new learnings. May the joy of today give us the courage to meet what tomorrow shall ask of us. Blessed be what is and what shall be. Amen. As we process to [the final location], let us sing together “Come and Go with Me.” Once there, please place your flower in the vase on the table and find a seat. (If copies of the responsive reading are not already placed on the chairs, add instructions about where to pick them up.) Song “Come and Go with Me” (African American spiritual) The group sings and walks toward the location of the ritual’s conclusion. The song leaders can spread themselves out through the group to assist in singing the hymn. Wait until everyone has gathered there before continuing.) Responsive Reading Please join me in a responsive reading. “A Place of Meeting” (Eileen Karpeles) Out of wood and stone, out of dream and sacrifice, the people build a home. P ARTICIPANTS: Out of the work of their hands and hearts and minds, the people fashion a symbol and a reality. L EADER: May this house be truly a place of meeting: meeting in warmth and joy and openness; meeting in courage and love and trust. P ARTICIPANTS: May all who enter here trust one another so surely that they may share the deep fires that burst into anger as much as the sweet spring waters that swell into laughter; the slow erosion of wounded tears as much as the soaring song. L EADER: May these walls know silence as a hundred hearts search inward, each for its own small spark of hope that might otherwise be snuffed out in the noise. P ARTICIPANTS: May these rafters hear the voice of the child as surely as that of the orator and the sound of the lute and the clack of the typewriter and the swish of the broom and know that all are as holy as the shout of a million stars. L EADER: May the rain fall lightly on this house and the sun shine warmly and the winds blow softly and bless it as a place of joy and peace. Song “We Are Building a New Way” (Martha Sandefer) (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing Knowing we are here but for a moment in time, And without each other we accomplish very little, And without love our achievements are hollow, Let us use our days well for the earth and our children, Attuned to life’s beauty and responsive to need, Till the rafters on high cannot hold our joy, and the beloved community belongs to all. (Extinguish the chalice.) Our chalice is extinguished and we have blessed this new space. Let us go in peace.