For Coming Out Day Rev. Rose Maldonado Schwab Dedicated to the author’s spouse, Ana Marcela Maldonado Morales This ritual blesses the LGBTQ+ community in three ways: it creates a sacred space for coming out, blesses those who are out, and provides allies space to offer support to the LGBTQ+ community. It is designed to be included in a congregational worship service immediately prior to National Coming Out Day (October 11). Materials None Setup Earlier in the service, sing Libby Roderick’s song “How Could Anyone.” It has been used around the world in spaces where people need to honor and be reminded of their wholeness. Play the tune of the song throughout the service whenever possible, giving it space to swell. The script given here assumes that the leader is a part of the LGBTQ+ community. If you are not, some of its language may need to be adapted. Script Meditation (If possible, alternate a few lines at a time of the meditation with a few lines of the melody of “How Could Anyone.”) This is the time in our service when we honor National Coming Out Day. During this ritual, I will be inviting members of the LGBTQ+ community forward, and then inviting our allies forward to sing to them. I invite you to move into a comfortable position in your chairs, whatever that looks like for you. Let your body relax as it wishes to. Take a soothing breath, drawing your awareness to your heart space. Imagine a little glowing diamond, deep inside your chest. When you breathe in, it glows, and when you breathe out, it dims. Draw to mind someone you love; imagine their face, and breathe. And now take your hands and place them face up in your lap. And feel, right in the very middle of your palm, a golden orb. When you breathe in, it glows; when you breathe out, it dims. It has pressure and a pulse. And now, draw your hands up and place them over your heart and repeat after me. (Read the following text line by line, pausing after each to let participants repeat what you have said.) May I be free from suffering. May I find sanctuary. May I be healed. Invitation to the LGBTQ+ Community And now I am going to list some categories. If the words I use apply to you, I invite you to be brave, rise, and join me here as you are willing and able. You may also stay in your seat and raise your hand if that is more comfortable. (Pause after each line to give people time to come forward or raise their hand, and to bear witness to those who do so.) I invite you to join me if you are a lesbian. If you are gay. If you are transgender. If you are nonbinary or gender nonconforming. If you are bi. If you are queer. If you are queer but pass as straight, whether through your presentation or through the relationship you are in. If you are questioning, if you have ever questioned, if you are closeted. If you hold an identity that wasn’t named but that is part of the beautiful, expansive universe of nonmainstream sexual orientations and gender identities. Sending Out Compassion And now, let us send out compassion to anyone here with us, and everyone out there in the world, who has chosen not to come out today. There are many reasons people may feel unsafe or uncomfortable with publicly sharing this part of themselves. Imagine the glowing orb in your palm growing warmer and brighter. Now send that warmth out to anyone who feels pressure not to come out. It may be someone you know; it may be a stranger; it may be yourself. Send them love; send them prayers for their physical and financial and emotional safety; send them hope. Laying on of Hands And now, everyone who has not come to the front or raised your hand, you have a very special job: to make this sanctuary one of the very few places in the world, even today, where LGBTQ+ people are considered full spiritual beings, with the right to worship and the right to the fullness of human relationship. Go ahead and take another soothing breath, and help us hold all the years of shame and anxiety that so many among us have gone through. Help take away the curse of ostracism, the pain of broken families. Here in this community, we believe that the human heart is a good and powerful agent in this world. In that spirit, I invite us into a laying on of hands for our LGBTQ+ community gathered here today. All you beautiful people who have come forward, and you beautiful LGBTQ+ people who have stayed in your seats: If you prefer not to be touched in this way, please cross your arms over your chest like this [demonstrate]. As we imagine a world without stigma or hatred for queer people, I invite the children and youth who have identified yourselves as LGBTQ+ to move toward an adult you know and like, especially one who is also LGBTQ+. And you trusted adults, unless they’ve crossed their arms, please put a hand on their shoulder. If they have crossed their arms, hold your open palms out to them, like this [demonstrate]. Other adults who have come forward, please gather around the young people. (Pause to let people move around.) And now, if you are an ally in the front row, I invite you to come forward as you are able and lay a hand on the shoulder, or back, or arm of one of the adults up here. If someone has crossed their arms, hold your open palms out to them. You can also stay in your seat and lay your hand on someone who has identified themselves as LGBTQ+, or open your loving palms to them if they’re too far away, or if either you or they prefer not to touch. And if you are LGBTQ+ but have chosen not to identify yourself today, know that the blessings are for you as well, even though we don’t know who you are. May you bless yourself as we bless you. (Pause to let people move around.) Allies in the next rows, please do the same, laying your hand on any willing adult or holding out your palms, joining in the interconnected web of blessing. You can come forward and join the gathering here, or stay in your seat, extending the web through the whole of this space. (Pause until everyone has joined the blessing as they wish to.) And now, take another breath and touch base with that diamond in your heart. Think of someone up here who you love; maybe it’s someone you’ve watched come out, or someone you just saw for the first time today. Bring them into your heart and send them loving kindness. Prayer May we be free from suffering. May we be free from shame. May we be free from the storms of guilt and rage. May we find here acceptance and love. May we know that we are whole and good in all our complicated beauty, that we are powerful beyond measure, that the fire of our creativity is needed to light this world. That one lightning flash of our beauty illuminates a whole new world. May the hands in this room be used for good. May we find a compassion bigger than our ego, a bravery wiser than our insecurities, a love stronger than our fear. Song “How Could Anyone” (Libby Roderick) (Lead participants in singing the song at least three times through, with swelling music.)