For Bidding Farewell to a Home Rev. Elizabeth Carrier-Ladd We move from home to home throughout our lives. We often offer rituals to bless new homes. But saying goodbye is just as important as saying hello. When we leave homes in which we have made significant memories, it is especially important to honor the transition and thank the home for holding us through those memorable times. The focus people of this ritual are the family members or housemates—as broadly defined as you wish—who have lived in the home. They should choose one or two of their group to lead it. Materials □ Small altar table, or cloth to designate altar space □ Chalice □ Candle(s) □ Small pieces of paper □ Optional: Music Setup The ideal time to do this ritual is in the empty home, right before leaving. If this is not logistically possible, it can be done in the home any time before moving out. Set up a chalice on an altar. Decorate the altar with any sacred objects that have meaning to you and your family or housemates. Four versions of the central element are offered; it can be verbal, written, or both, and short, medium length, or long. Choose the one that suits everyone’s preferences, available time, stress levels, etc., or mix and match parts of several. Script Chalice Lighting We live lives of transition. We do not stay anywhere forever. We are in motion: from place to place, from learning to learning, from moment to moment. And yet we find and create places of meaning as we journey. We put down roots in those places and cultivate growth in our lives through them. Where we live matters. As we prepare to leave this place, let us light this chalice in the spirit of transition, knowing that this flame will light this sacred space for but a short time before we extinguish it, and that our time here draws quickly to a close. We light this chalice with joy for what is before us and sorrow for what we have to leave behind in order to journey on. (Light the chalice.) Sharing Memories with Gratitude Option 1: Short and verbal This house has held so much over the years that we have lived here. It has been a part of our lives. We have laughed and cried here. We have hugged and argued here. We have made important decisions for ourselves here. We have returned here after long days to process and reconnect to what matters most. This house has held us. It has been our home. So much has happened in this space. Let us remember and honor together all that holds us in this time. You might remember a specific moment, or a habit or tradition you had here; it might be something you felt or did alone, or it might be something that some or all of us shared together. As you’re moved, please say, “I remember” and tell us what you’re thinking of. If you’d like to honor an experience but keep it private, you can just say, “I remember something that happened here.” After each memory, we will respond together: Thank you for being our home. We remember … (Pause to let everyone share. Don’t forget to do so yourself! After each memory is offered, lead participants in saying, “Thank you for being our home.” Once everyone has said everything they want to say, continue.) Thank you for being our home. For holding us and sheltering us. For giving us warmth and light and safety. Thank you for the gifts of these many memories, which we take with us on to our next resting place. We will remember all that has been shared and honor those memories held privately in our hearts. Our time here has passed, but we take so much with us from the time we have had. Our hearts overflow with gratitude. Option 2: Medium length and written (This option gives participants a way to honor their memories of the home without sharing them publicly. After the ritual, participants can choose to keep their writing or let it go, such as by burning the paper.) This house has held so much over the years that we have lived here. It has been a part of our lives. We have laughed and cried here. We have hugged and argued here. We have made important decisions for ourselves here. We have returned here after long days to process and reconnect to what matters most. This house has held us. It has been our home. We have made many memories here. Let us take some time to honor what has happened in this space. Let us write down some of the memories that we take with us from this home. They could be of specific moments, such as [name one or two events you all remember], or they could be habits or traditions, like [name one or two familiar practices, such as shared dinners or children’s bath time]. You might remember things we shared together, or things you felt or did alone. All of these are worthy of honoring. These memories are only for you. Once we’re done here, you may choose to keep them or let them go. (Allow time for writing memories together. Play some instrumental music, if it would be helpful.) So much has happened in this home. We thank you, home, for being our home. Will you join me in saying: Thank you for being our home! P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you for being our home. L EADER: Thank you for being our home. For holding us and sheltering us. For giving us warmth and light and safety. Thank you for the gifts of these many memories, which we take with us on to our next resting place. Our time here has passed, but we take so much with us from the time we have had. Our hearts overflow with gratitude. (You may conclude by walking around the home and together thanking each room. Or you may hold hands in a circle in a central or important place and thank the whole home.) Option 3: Medium length and verbal (This option gives participants time to share memories associated with different rooms and spaces in the home. You can bring the lit chalice with you as you move around, or leave it behind and return to it at the end of the ritual. If you prefer not to move around as the script directs, you could stay in one place and simply say, “When we think of the kitchen, we remember,” “When we think of the porch, we remember,” and so on. In this case, you might consider taking a stroll through the home after the ritual is complete to say farewell to each room. Per haps place a hand on a wall or sit down in each room to say a proper goodbye.) This house has held so much over the years that we have lived here. It has been a part of our lives. We have laughed and cried here. We have hugged and argued here. We have made important decisions for ourselves here. We have returned here after long days to process and reconnect to what matters most. This house has held us. It has been our home. We have made many memories here. Let us take some time to honor what has happened in this space. So much has happened in this home. As we move through each room, let us share our memories with each other and with all that holds us in this time. The memory could be of a specific moment, such as [name one or two events you all remember], or it could be a habit or tradition, like [name one or two familiar practices, such as shared dinners or children’s bath time]. After each memory, we will respond together: Thank you for being our home. L EADER: In the [name the room you are in], we remember … (Pause to let everyone share. Don’t forget to do so yourself! After each memory is offered, lead participants in saying, “Thank you for being our home.” Once everyone has said everything they want to say, move to the next room, name it, and invite memories in the same way. Continue until you have visited every room or other space you want to.) Thank you for being our home. For holding us and sheltering us. For giving us warmth and light and safety. Thank you for the gifts of these many memories, which we take with us on to our next resting place. We will remember all that has been shared, and honor those memories held privately in our hearts. Our time here has passed, but we take so much with us from the time we have had. Our hearts overflow with gratitude. Option 4: Longer, both written and verbal (Giving participants the chance to write down memories and then share the ones that feel right to share allows them to process their memories and feelings in multiple ways. While this takes the most time, it is worth it if your group has the time and energy for it. This option has participants stay in one place while remembering different rooms and spaces in the home, so you might consider taking a stroll through the home after the ritual is complete to say farewell to each. Per haps place a hand on a wall or sit down in each room to say a proper goodbye. Alternatively, you could move from place to place in the home as you share the memories associated with each. You can bring the lit chalice with you as you move around, or leave it behind and return to it at the end of the ritual.) This house has held so much over the years that we have lived here. It has been a part of our lives. We have laughed and cried here. We have hugged and argued here. We have made important decisions for ourselves here. We have returned here after long days to process and reconnect to what matters most. This house has held us. It has been our home. We have made many memories here. Let us take some time to honor what has happened in this home. Let us write down some of the memories that we take with us from this home. They could be of specific moments, such as [name one or two events you all remember], or they could be habits or traditions, like [name one or two familiar practices, such as shared dinners or children’s bath time]. You might remember things we shared together, or things you felt or did alone. They might be associated with specific rooms or spaces, or with the home as a whole. (Allow time for writing memories together. Play some instrumental music, if it would be helpful.) So much has happened in this home. Let us share our memories with each other and with all that holds us in this time. We will go through memories we associate with particular rooms first, and then ones of the whole home. Of course, you don’t have to share anything you don’t want to. If you’d like to honor an experience but keep it private, you can just say, “I remember something that happened here.” After each memory, we will respond together: Thank you for being our home. L EADER: When we think of [name a room or space], we remember … (Pause to let everyone share. Don’t forget to do so yourself! After each memory is offered, lead participants in saying, “Thank you for being our home.” Once everyone has said everything they want to say, name the next room or space and invite memories in the same way. Continue until you have named every room or other space you want to.) Thank you for being our home. For holding us and sheltering us. For giving us warmth and light and safety. Thank you for the gifts of these many memories, which we take with us on to our next resting place. We will remember all that has been shared and honor those memories held privately in our hearts. Our time here has passed, but we take so much with us from the time we have had. Our hearts overflow with gratitude. Chalice Extinguishing Our time here is over. We have said goodbye. We are thankful for so much of what has happened here. We are grateful for the presence of the holy in this home today and each day we lived here. We ask that this space continue to hold our love as it welcomes new people into its rooms. Our time here is over. This light is released. (Extinguish the chalice.) May it be so. Blessed be. Amen.