For Nourishing Justice Makers Rev. Aisha Ansano and Rev. Emily Conger This ritual explores the power and possibility of building beloved community, sharing the challenges and blessing one another for this long-haul commitment of generations. We recommend it for anyone striving for justice who needs nourishment for the long haul: youth groups going on a service trip, a social justice committee preparing for or in the midst of a new project, boards doing visioning, or even a whole congregation, as part of a worship service. Materials □ Chalice □ Food or drink, a few bites or small cup for each participant (could also be imaginary) □ Copies of the litany of challenges Setup This ritual could be used to start a meeting, as part of a retreat or worship service, or on its own. It includes both full group and small group parts. Arrange the space so that folks can see one another. Chairs in a circle or around a large table would work well, or if the group is very large, smaller tables or clusters of chairs. If you have eight or fewer people, you can do the entire ritual together. Otherwise, you should create space to split into groups of four or five people who will bless one another. Set up the food or drink as needed in the space. If you don’t know what dietary restrictions folks have, it’s better to invite them to imagine food or drinks than to provide something that not everyone can share. You could also just provide water. If your group is too large to begin in a single circle together, plan to read the litany of challenges yourself or recruit helpers to do so. Ensure that the helpers are scattered around the room, not clumped together. Script Opening Words Welcome to this ritual of renewal and nourishment for the long-haul commitment of building beloved community together. This ritual includes sharing from our hearts, eating together, and blessing one another. When we gather around a table, we can build community, find beauty in our shared experiences, and celebrate our differences. We can feed one another in body and spirit to sustain this important ministry together. We want to acknowledge that food and eating can be complicated for many of us. We come to the table with experiences and stories that are joyful and painful and everything in between. We welcome you into this space and honor the experiences that you are bringing, the feelings you are holding, and all of who you are. Chalice Lighting (Invite someone to light the chalice as you read these words.) Let us join together in a spirit of gratitude. We light our chalice, marking this time together as sacred. Let us enter into this space, nourished by the love and warmth of community. Framing Our Task To paraphrase the nineteenth-century Unitarian minister Rev. Theodore Parker, although the arc of the moral universe is a long one, and although we cannot experience its full curve, we can still deeply believe that it bends toward justice—and that we can have a part in bending it that way. Together we are striving to bend the arc, to build beloved community. To build a world rooted in love and justice, with accountability and sustainability at its core. This is an important commitment that will take all of us. This is a task that will take generations. We build on the legacy of those who have come before us, and we do our part during our lifetimes. And we will pass on what we have done to those who come after, creating foundations upon which they can build. We may experience some of the results of our efforts, but their effects spread in ways we may never fully know. It is hard to stay committed to such a long task with few clear results. In order to make this powerful, sustaining, generational transformation, we must create a container that is sustainable, that nourishes us even as we do so much, that allows us to continue on even when things are challenging. Naming the Challenges Together, let us take time to notice and name the challenges that are present in this powerful commitment we are making together. [If participants are in a single circle together] For this litany of challenges, we’ll go around the circle. You can pass, or if you like you can read a challenge from the list. Each time someone reads, we will all respond by saying, “Together, we journey in love.” At the end, there will be time for naming other challenges that come to mind. [If participants are split into several groups] We will hear a litany of challenges read aloud. After each one, we will all respond by saying, “Together, we journey in love.” At the end, there will be time for naming other challenges that come to mind. (Participants or designated helpers read the challenges below one by one, pausing after each to let the group respond.) R EADER: We are confronted with our fears of doing or saying the wrong thing. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We wonder if we have the capacity to do this, if we are enough to do this, if we are the right ones to do this. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We face the scary possibility that we have not built trusting, accountable relationships. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We worry that we are not following the lead of those most affected by what we are addressing. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We fear that we won’t learn from our mistakes and will continue to make them. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We worry that it will be hard to follow through on our vision with time, money, and other resources. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We know that institutions move as slowly as glaciers, and fear that ours will move more slowly than the speed of trust. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We face systemic problems that are embedded and entangled in everything. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We fear that in the face of so much, we might freeze and our institutions might die. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We know that we are mired in white supremacy culture. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We face internalized oppression, taking in all that our society has told us is true about ourselves and the world around us. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. R EADER: We worry that our approach may be unsustainable and cause us to burn out. P ARTICIPANTS: Together, we journey in love. L EADER: I invite you now to name other challenges, fears, and worries that we face in movement building, leaving space after each one for us all to respond with “Together, we journey in love.” (Allow some quiet space for people to name challenges. When all who wish to have spoken, allow a bit of silence, then continue.) These challenges can be daunting and overwhelming. May we be comforted by knowing that we are held by a larger community and a greater love. Song “Comfort Me” (Mimi Bornstein-Doble) Let us pause for sacred rest as we sing, hum, or sway along to “Comfort Me,” by Mimi Bornstein-Doble. (Sing or play the first verse of “Comfort Me.”) Blessing (If you have eight or fewer participants, you can do this activity as a single group; if not, split participants into groups of four or five before proceeding.) We’ve talked about the power and possibility of beloved community, and the challenges that we are each facing on the path toward it. Holding those, I want you to think about what blessing you need to receive to help you move toward beloved community, to keep engaging sustainably. When we’re ready, someone can share the blessing they need to hear with the group. Then one person who feels moved to speak will offer that blessing to them. For example, I might say, “I need the blessing of joy to continue finding pleasure in movement building.” And you might respond with “May you be blessed with joy” or “Blessed be.” Whoever feels moved to do so can begin by naming the blessing that they need. Anyone else can offer that blessing. And then the next person can speak the blessing they need. You can ask for a specific blessing or a very general one, or you can pass if you prefer. Let us begin. (Allow five or ten minutes for everyone to name and receive their blessings.) Nourishment (If you’ve split into smaller groups, invite everyone back together.) This commitment that we are making together, of building beloved community and sustaining one another, is challenging, and it is a long-haul commitment. It can only be done through learning, growing, and supporting one another in community. Some of how we support one another is by literally providing sustenance to each other, feeding the bodies and spirits of our community to allow us all to continue moving forward. To embody this practice of finding nourishment for the long haul and supporting one another in it, we’re going to do a ritual where we nourish one another. In this moment, I invite you to find a bit of food or a sip of drink, whatever you choose, whether it is real or imagined. We’ll each hold up our food or drink and say, “I offer this nourishment for the long haul.” Then we eat or drink what we’re holding, to receive the blessing. So first, I’m going to offer a blessing to all of you. For this one, just eat or drink half of what you’re holding, because we’ll do a shared blessing next. But first— (Hold a bit of food or a drink up and look at everyone.) I offer this nourishment for the long haul. Now take a bite or sip to receive the blessing. (Participants take a bite or a sip.) Now I invite you to look around the room and hold up your offering of food or drink, and say the blessing with me: “I offer this nourishment for the long haul.” P ARTICIPANTS: I offer this nourishment for the long haul. L EADER: And eat or drink again, to receive this blessing that we have all offered each other. (Participants take a bite or sip; eat or drink what you are holding as well.) Beloveds, as we go forth, may we be the people who know the challenges we face, and who journey through them in love, together. May we use the deep wisdom within us to know that we are connected to each other in love and generosity and nourishment. May we know that our powerful collaborative community is stronger than any of us alone. Together, we can sustainably build toward the beloved community. Chalice Extinguishing “We Hold Hope Close” (Julián Jamaica Soto) We close our time together with the words of Rev. Julián Jamaica Soto in “Spilling the Light”: In this community, we hold hope close. We don’t always know what comes next, but that cannot dissuade us. We don’t always know just what to do, but that will not mean that we are lost in the wilderness. We rely on the certainty beneath, the foundation of our values and ethics. We are the people who return to love like a North Star and to the truth that we are greater together than we are alone. Our hope does not live in some glimmer of an indistinct future. Rather, we know the way to the world of which we dream, and by covenant and the movement forward of one right action and the next, we know that one day we will arrive at home. (Extinguish the chalice.)