For Grief during the Winter Holidays Rev. Emily Bruce This Longest Night ritual is a meditative ritual designed to create sacred space for the grief and loss that so often accompany the winter holidays, and yet can be obscured in the blur of celebrations. It is usually held as part of a worship service on an evening near the winter solstice, a date often concurrent with the Christian feast day of St. Thomas the Apostle. In Christian belief, St. Thomas struggled to accept the truth of Jesus’ resurrection as the other apostles did, and is therefore called “doubting Thomas”; this ritual can make space for one’s struggles with faith in the midst of grief and sorrow. The celebration of the winter solstice centers on the idea of waiting, in winter darkness, for the coming of the light. (The Christian observance of Advent at this season similarly anticipates the birth of Jesus.) This ritual provides a space of quiet and reflection so that participants may contemplate the struggles that lie on their hearts and how the coming light may provide illumination for them in their spiritual journey. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Taper or tea light candles, at least two for each participant □ Taper candles with drip guards, at least one for each participant □ Twinkle lights, candles, etc., for decoration □ Singing bowl or bell Setup To create a quiet and reflective meditative space, hold the ritual at dusk or in the evening. Turn off all overhead lights and bright lights of any kind; use warm, soft, and low lights, especially candles and twinkle lights (shining steadily, not flashing). Put the chalice on the altar table, and put at least two candles for each participant either on the altar table as well or on another table in an accessible location; have some extra candles nearby in case they’re needed. Recruit helpers to give each participant a taper candle (with drip guard) as they enter, and to help with candle lighting during the ritual. The songs suggested here are from the Taizé Christian monastic community. Taizé songs have simple and repetitive lyrics, meaning that people can learn them quickly. Any alternative song choices should be similarly simple. Script Opening Words Good evening and welcome to [congregation’s name]. Whoever you are and wherever you are on your spiritual journey, you are welcome here. On your way into our space, you should have been given a small taper candle. If you did not receive one, please raise your hand and the helpers will bring one to you. Please just hold on to it for now; we will light some other candles first, and come to these ones toward the end. We invite you now to relax into your seat and take a cleansing breath in … and out. This time is for you. This is a time for rest, for prayer, for meditation, and for healing. This ritual is an opportunity to hold space for all that lies on our hearts during this holiday season. To give ourselves the grace to just be here, now. So we invite you to mentally put down your to-do list—it will be there when this ritual ends. Please silence your cell phones—they will also be there when this ritual ends. Give yourself the gift of being present to this sacred space, to these people, to this moment. Chalice Lighting We begin by lighting our chalice, a symbol of light and faith, with these words: For those who are grieving, for those who are longing, for those who are lonely, For those who are tired, for those who are stressed, for those who simply crave a moment’s peace. For each of you who are in this sanctuary tonight, you are the reason we are here. This chalice is lit for you. Song “Stay with Me” (Jacques Berthier) Please join us in singing our first meditative song, “Stay With Me.” We will sing this song several times through, so as you come to feel comfortable with it you are encouraged to put down the music and close your eyes as you sing. While you sing, contemplate why you’re here, what burdens rest on your heart, and what you might want to release in this space. (Lead participants in singing the song through up to ten times.) Reading “Blessing for the Longest Night” (Jan Richardson) All throughout these months as the shadows have lengthened, this blessing has been gathering itself, making ready, preparing for this night. It has practiced walking in the dark, traveling with its eyes closed, feeling its way by memory by touch by the pull of the moon even as it wanes. So believe me when I tell you this blessing will reach you even if you have not light enough to read it; it will find you even though you cannot see it coming. You will know the moment of its arriving by your release of the breath you have held so long; a loosening of the clenching in your hands, of the clutch around your heart; a thinning of the darkness that had drawn itself around you. This blessing does not mean to take the night away but it knows its hidden roads, knows the resting spots along the path, knows what it means to travel in the company of a friend. So when this blessing comes, take its hand. Get up. Set out on the road you cannot see. This is the night when you can trust that any direction you go, you will be walking toward the dawn. Silent Meditation As we move into a time of meditation and prayer, we invite you to reflect on what lies on your heart in this moment. What did you bring with you into this space? What are you sitting with right now? Whether it is something that brings you grief, anxiety, or joy, we encourage you to allow its presence as you rest in this space. We will now take meaningful time to sit in silence—for prayer, for meditation, or if you prefer, simply to breathe slowly and intentionally. The bell ring will signify the beginning and end of this time of silence. (Ring the bell once. Hold space for meditation for approximately five minutes. Ring the bell again at the end.) Candles of Loss This season is a time of remembrance and reflection—remembering the loved ones we have lost and reflecting on the year that is coming to an end. Holding grief for those whose absence we feel and reckoning with the events of the past year. We now invite you to light a candle for those beloveds whose absence you are feeling most strongly at this time of year: the family, friends, and loved ones whose spirits remain with you in memory. You can also light a candle for other losses you may be grieving this year, such as loss of employment, loss of a relationship, or loss of health. If you like, you can come forward and light a candle here, whenever you feel called to do so. You can also raise your hand, and a helper will bring a candle to you for you to light or offer any other help you may want. As we are lighting candles, we will sing our second meditative song, “Within Our Darkest Night.” You are invited to join in singing whenever you are ready. (Allow ample time for everyone to light their candles, repeating the song as many times as needed. Helpers bring candles to participants as needed, and put their lit candles on the table with the others.) Song “Within Our Darkest Night” (Jacques Berthier) (Music begins as the candle lighting ritual starts. Lead participants in singing it as many times as needed, until all who wish to light candles have done so.) Candles of Blessing Life is both loss and blessing, sorrow and joy. So often, both are intricately intertwined. For that reason, we now invite you to light a candle for what you have not lost—for the blessings of this life for which you are grateful, for the loved ones who surround you in body or in spirit, and for the richness of community that encourages you to keep faith in yourselves and each other. For all of these blessings and many more that may remain unspoken, we invite you now to light another candle. Please raise a hand or come forward as you feel called. As we are lighting candles, we will sing our next meditative hymn, “Ubi Caritas.” You are invited to join in singing whenever you are ready. (Again, allow ample time. Helpers assist as before.) Song “Ubi Caritas” (traditional Christian hymn) (Music begins as the candle lighting ritual starts. Lead participants in singing it as many times as needed, until all who wish to light candles have done so.) Candles of Hope Finally, we now invite you to light a candle for yourself—for that divine spark that resides inside of you. You may light a candle to set your intentions for the year to come, to make space for the journey that lies ahead, or as a silent prayer for the hopes and dreams that are in your heart. For this, you may use the small taper candle that was given you when you entered. Please remain seated; we will pass the flame one to another, around the room. And we will sing again, this time “Nada Te Turbe.” Song “Nada Te Turbe” (words by Santa Teresa de Jesus, music by Jacques Berthier) (Light a taper candle of your own from the chalice, and use it to light one or a few participants’ tapers; guide them in passing the flame on. Helpers might assist here. Lead participants in singing the song as many times as needed, until all participants’ tapers are lit.) Prayer Friends, will you please join me in the spirit of prayer? Holy Light, Holy Presence, Holy Love, We honor all of the souls whose light is represented by these candles. May this light be a blessing to those who miss them and a symbol of the love that remains ever present between them. We witness the pain and the grief that is present in this space. May this light assure you that you are seen, that you are held, and that you are not alone. May you feel the presence of the ancestors, saints, and loved ones that journey with you today and every day. We raise up all of the tender hearts present in this space. For the weariness, for the anxiety, for the overwhelm, may this light be a symbol of peace. You are not forsaken. We all struggle with you and we all pray for you, that you may receive the blessings of nourishment, rest, and well-being. We turn our faces to the light to witness the holy presence in our lives, the holy love in the world that surrounds us, and to lift up our gratitude for the many blessings of this world. Amidst your daily strife, may you remember that you are enough, you are worthy, and you are loved. May it be so. Amen. I invite you to extinguish your candles, but not the divine spark that resides within you. (Extinguish your own taper.) Silent Meditation As we move into a final time of silent meditation and prayer, we invite you to reflect on whatever is rising in your heart right now, after this ritual of contemplation we have shared together. It may be grief, or joy, or both, or something else. Breathe peacefully into the peace of this sanctuary, and allow your heart to rest open. We hope that this time of silence can offer you healing and blessing. (Ring the bell once. Hold space for meditation for approximately five minutes. Ring the bell again at the end.) Song “Spirit of Life” (Carolyn McDade) Please join us in singing once more, in whatever way you are comfortable. We will sing “Spirit of Life.” As we sing, contemplate who or what is present to you in this moment. Whether it is the holy presence of God, the memory of a loved one, or a presence that’s in your life today, you are invited to reflect on how they love and support you, on how their role in your life is meaningful. (Lead participants in singing.) Chalice Extinguishing Friends, as we go from this place, May we remember that light and shadow are the rhythms of the world. We need not be afraid. We are not alone in our experience of either. May this time of shared solitude and song be a grace upon you, bringing you comfort and connection, soothing your soul, whether it is weary, worried, or longing. And as we extinguish this chalice [do so now], may the love that is present in this sanctuary surround you. May you see with soft eyes the interconnected web of existence, of which we all are a part. May the coming of the light fill your spirit and guide you, as we leave this space. May it be so. Amen. (Instrumental music plays as people leave the space.)