For Affirming Names and Pronouns Rev. Shige Sakurai In memory of Jude Maloney This is a ritual for affirming someone’s name and/or pronouns, particularly those of a trans and/or nonbinary person. It is written to recognize one person, but may be easily adapted. It could affirm multiple focus people at once, for example as part of an annual service. It could also be adapted for name changes unrelated to gender, such as because of a shift in relationship or family, or to reclaim a heritage or personal agency. The author is nonbinary and goes by they/them pronouns. Materials □ Chalice □ Plant selected by the focus person (preferably one that has roots and requires water) □ Water in a container for pouring □ Optional: Poem or short reading □ Optional: Closing music Setup It is important to work closely with the focus person to customize this ritual. They may or may not want you to explain their name and pronouns, and how they should be referred to, in detail; they may even wish to do so themselves. If they have been using their name for a while, the ritual might be designed more to reaffirm it than to declare it or mark their claiming of it. The focus person may wish to choose a plant that represents something about their personality, their interests, or even their gender or heritage. Some focus people may wish to provide poetry or music that speaks to their experiences, or incorporate into the ritual phrases or actions derived from their own traditions or that allow them to reclaim power from traditions that have taken it away from them in the past. If you want to include a reading, find out if they would like to choose one, perhaps relating to their heritage, culture, or background. When leading the ritual, be sure to use the focus person’s correct pronouns when referring to them. After the ritual is over, the plant could be donated to a congregation or kept by the focus person as a memento. If it is kept at a place of worship, it may make sense to display alongside it the name and pronouns of the focus person, as a reminder to the community. Script Chalice Lighting As we light this chalice, we join in this special time together in warmth and support. (Light the chalice.) Let us witness, reflect upon, and affirm our communities in their wholeness, and in recognizing both common humanity and the uniqueness of each individual. Opening Words Today, we recognize a particular beloved member of our community, who has brought a plant. Let us remember that this plant is a sacred symbol in this moment, and that whatever may happen to it in the future will not in any way diminish the inspiration and affirmation of this moment and the ever-flowing powers of love and care that this ceremony carries. Plants are our siblings. Plants grow and change over time, they make transitions, and they become rooted. Some plants flower or produce fruit—sometimes regularly, sometimes only after many years. Some produce pollen, and some do not. Some change drastically over time. Some grow better in one climate than another. But the vast majority of plants have roots, they live in the earth, they need and create air, they take in water as nourishment, and they require the fire of the sunlight. Like humans, plants are diverse, they are complex, and they change and develop over time. Like us, plants are both deeply individual and interdependent with their environments. The roots of this plant represent the autonomy and rootedness of the individual to name themselves. Today, let us witness the proclamation of our beloved community member, and the invitation to pour in our love and support, symbolized by our ritual of watering this plant. Rite of Self-Naming In this rite of self-naming, I invite our participant to first release a previous name [and pronouns], and then to declare a name [and pronouns] before our community. Focus PERSON: I release to the universe the name [and pronouns] by which I have previously been known. L EADER: We hold you in love and liberation. P ARTICIPANTS: We hold you in love and liberation. F OCUS PERSON: I now declare before you that my name is [Name] and my pronouns are [_____]. L EADER: [Name], we hold you in love and liberation. P ARTICIPANTS: [Name], we hold you in love and liberation. (The focus person may choose to offer brief personal comments or thanks, or describe the plant they brought and what it represents for them.) Optional Reading (Read, or invite a community member to read, a short poem or other text.) Community Commitment As a community gathered here today, we now offer our support for [Name] and [their] freedom, protection, and well-being. We commit ourselves to centering those who have been pushed to the side. We commit to our own learning, and to the correcting of mistakes that can cause harm. [Name], we delight in your right to declare your own name [and pronouns], and we commit to respecting this most personal aspect of your selfhood. May it be so. P ARTICIPANTS: May it be so. L EADER: We now pour in this water to nourish your plant, a symbol of the connection between the community and your individuality, a symbol of our love for your rootedness and our collective opportunity for growth. We hold each other in love and liberation. P ARTICIPANTS: We hold each other in love and liberation. (Pour the water into the plant pot. Alternatively, the focus person could choose one or a few significant people to pour it.) Chalice Extinguishing May we always uphold the humanity of ourselves and others, and may we cherish the proclamations witnessed today. Even as we extinguish this chalice, may we each hold ourselves and each other accountable, and may we carry this flame, a light of liberation, in our hearts. (Extinguish the chalice. If you wish, close with a song or other music.)