For the Winter Solstice Rev. Wendy Bartel and Rev. Lynn Gardner This ritual honors both the dark and the light on the winter solstice. It can be adapted for a small or larger group of any age range. The authors have participated in and facilitated a variety of Earth-centered traditions, rituals, and ceremonies. This ritual was first co-created to conclude a full evening winter solstice service in Auburn, California, and has since continued to evolve. Materials □ Altar table □ Chalice □ Chocolate, at least one piece for each participant □ Mandarins or other citrus, at least one slice for each participant □ Alternative foods for those who do not eat chocolate or citrus □ Trays or plates □ Music Setup This ritual should be held at night, when darkness and candlelight help to set a tone for the turning of the seasons. If possible, dim the lights and/or light candles around the outside of the circle, at a safe distance from participants. Place chairs in a circle, leaving openings for folks to enter and exit the circle and for those using wheelchairs, scooters, etc. If you have a large gathering, you might consider concentric circles. It is ideal to have nothing but the altar table in the middle so you can move about. On one tray, lay out alternatives for those who do not eat chocolate or citrus. Choose something dark and something light; one simple option is individually wrapped purple and yellow sugar-free hard candies. Lay them out on a tray, arranging the dark ones on one side and the light ones on the other. Break the chocolate bars into bite-size chunks and lay them out on one side of each remaining tray. Peel the fruit and lay out wedges on the other side, arranging them like sun rays. Provide enough that all attendees can have one of each item, with a few left over so there is a sense of abundance. You may want to set out napkins or paper muffin cups for participants to use as well. On the altar table, place a chalice and the prepared trays. Consider draping fabrics, placing some local evergreens or bare branches, lighting candles, and having soft wintery (but not Christmas) music playing as folks are arriving. Script Chalice Lighting Welcome, one and all, to this ritual of nourishment as we honor the winter solstice! [Offer greetings and orientation to the space as is appropriate to your context.] I open this gathering with the lighting of a chalice. The cup holds this community, and the flame is a spark of possibility, held in the circles of darkness and light, for we need both to live. (Light the chalice.) Opening Words As we gather on this longest night in the northern hemisphere on this beautiful planet Earth, let us abide in the wonder and mystery. What was it like so many millennia ago when the days grew shorter and the nights grew longer, and often colder, and people did not understand why? Were they afraid? Many stories suggest they were. How would they survive? Would the animals and the plants upon which they depended for their own survival die? In the early incarnation of our human species, I wonder what else they felt and what history they passed on to their children. What meaning did they make of the growing darkness? Did they gather around the fire and tell the stories of their people? Did they overhunt or overharvest for fear this was the beginning of the end? Did their spiritual leaders suggest they needed to make more offerings to the gods of their understanding, to implore them to bring back the sun? And then … what did they do when they realized the days were finally getting longer? Was there confusion? Relief? Or maybe even jubilation? When did the observers or the wise ones or the elders realize they could predict the cycle and know when to enact whatever rituals they believed would call back the light? It is, of course, also possible that they welcomed the growing darkness. Maybe they were glad to have a bit more downtime from hunting and gathering, and instead settle into the gifts of the darkness: rest and reflection, connection and devotion. We cannot know for sure. (Pause.) At this time of year, we often gather to tell stories both ancient and new. We offer one another gifts. And we participate in rituals, like this one, as we arrive in winter, with hope to find our way toward spring. We need not rush out of the dark, though. Many messages in our culture devalue the dark and teach us to fear. Our language often conveys that darkness is dangerous—monsters are in the dark, bad things happen in dark alleys—and yet so much relies on the dark: the gestation of new life, including our own; decomposition that nourishes the soil; the practice of hibernation or going within that allows us to heal, reintegrate, and recover so we are ready for what will come. Many of us sleep better when it is dark, whether or not it is nighttime. There is a sweetness, a vulnerability, in gestation, in decomposition, in hibernation, in restoration. Have you ever felt moved watching a loved one sleeping? And many of us say “Sweet dreams” when someone is heading off to sleep. There may be danger in the dark, but there is also sweetness. And we often associate light with goodness, with the divine. The sun’s warmth and light help plants to grow. Light helps many of us to do our daily tasks. And yet, too much light is exhausting and even harmful for many species. Both are true. And there is something joyful as the Earth orbits the sun and birds begin to return, the days grow longer, and we see new life growing. There is joy in the first crocus pushing through snow. Let us not rush toward the light. We need both darkness and light to thrive. These cycles of life and death and rebirth are apparent in the seasons too. Tonight, we rest in the dark as the winter solstice comes upon us. What will we pass on to our children about the importance of light and darkness? How might we celebrate both together? Let us take some quiet time to just slow down, noticing our breath as it moves in and out of us, and consider the ways we can celebrate dark and light. (Pause for contemplation. After a few moments, begin the melody of “Honor the Dark” to invite folks back to the present moment. You might have a musician playing live, or a recording.) We invite you to listen to this beautiful song by Lea Morris, “Honor the Dark.” You are invited to sing along as the words become familiar. Song “Honor the Dark” (Lea Morris) (Lead participants in singing.) “Until only love remains.” As we near the winter solstice, we journey into the darkness and also celebrate the return of the sun. I invite you to consider quietly what you might need as nourishment for the journey. (Pause.) Sharing Nourishment We are invited into this circle tonight, a circle of worth, a circle where all are held, a circle where we honor the dark and the light at this winter solstice time, for we need both darkness and light to survive. We also know that in many ways the dark, the darkness, the shadow is not valued—is actually denigrated. Tonight we interrupt that false narrative and declare our appreciation of the dark and of the sweet time it allows for reflection, renewal, and nourishment. And as we kindle fires and candles, we celebrate the light with joy, too. Tonight, we will offer one another a blessing of nourishment—a reminder of the nourishment we get from both the light and the dark. We will pass around trays of chocolate and oranges, or if you prefer, there are also sugarless candies [or whatever you have provided]. When you receive a tray, offer it to your neighbor and say, “May the darkness bring sweetness. May the light bring joy.” They choose a dark treat and a light one. If you need a different tray, just give a gentle wave and we’ll bring you one. After your neighbor has taken their treats, give them the tray, and they will offer it to the next person. And so it goes around the circle. As you feel ready, you are invited to enjoy the sweetness of the chocolate or dark candy. Then let the brightness of the mandarin or light candy bring you joy. At the end we’ll share our blessing all together, and it is my hope you will join me in saying, “May the darkness bring sweetness. May the light bring joy.” Let’s practice, shall we? P ARTICIPANTS: May the darkness bring sweetness. May the light bring joy. L EADER: We will all hold the sacred space of the circle, attend to the passing and receiving, and open our hearts as the blessings of nourishment travel around. Let us begin. (Begin to pass the trays of chocolate and citrus, one in each direction. Then pick up the tray of alternative options and make your way around the circle, offering it to anyone who may want it. When everyone has participated, bring all the trays back to the table.) L EADER: We have shared the blessings of nourishment with one another. Together, let us share our affirmation: P ARTICIPANTS: May the darkness bring sweetness! May the light bring joy! L EADER: May they indeed! Responsive Blessing Please join me in a responsive blessing. You’ll repeat the last part of each line, the thank-you. Let us give thanks to the Earth for these blessings of nourishment! Thank you, Earth! P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you, Earth! L EADER: Let us give thanks to the Sun for these blessings of nourishment! Thank you, Sun! P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you, Sun! L EADER: Let us give thanks to the seed savers, farmers, harvesters, transporters, and grocers for these blessings of nourishment! Thank you, food providers! P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you, food providers! L EADER: And we give thanks to the Love that holds us all. Thank you, Love! P ARTICIPANTS: Thank you, Love! Chalice Extinguishing As you head off into the night, go gently. Take time to notice the gifts in the darkness. We are so grateful for your presence and your participation. You are welcome to stay and talk with one another and partake in more blessings. When you are ready to head out on this longest night, go with peace, go with anticipation, and go with these blessings. A blessed winter solstice to you all! (Extinguish the chalice.)